[PDF PAGE 1]

[PDF PAGE 2]
Charlie Munger

[PDF PAGE 3]
 CHARLIE MUNGER
THE COMPLETE INVESTOR




     TREN GRIFFIN

[PDF PAGE 4]
                                      Columbia University Press
                                       Publishers Since 1893


                                New York Chichester, West Sussex
                             Copyright © 2015 Columbia University Press
                                         All rights reserved
                                    E-ISBN 978-0-231-54041-4


                        Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
                                       Griffin, Trenholme J.
                       Charlie Munger: the complete investor / Tren Griffin.
                                             pages cm
                           Includes bibliographical references and index.
               ISBN 978-0-231-17098-7 (cloth : alk. paper); 978-0-231-54041-4 (ebook)
                      1. Munger, Charles T., 1924-2. Investments. 3. Finance.
                                I. Munger, Charles T., 1924-II. Title.


                                        HG172.M84G75 2015
                                           332.6–dc23


2015002292

                                 A Columbia University Press E-book.
CUP would be pleased to hear about your reading experience with this e-book at cup-ebook@columbia.edu.


                                     JACKET ILLUSTRATION:
                                          Charlie Powell
                                        COVER DESIGN:
                                       Jordan Wannemacher


   References to Internet Web sites (URLs) were accurate at the time of writing. Neither the author nor
Columbia University Press is responsible for URLs that may have expired or changed since the manuscript
                                              was prepared.

[PDF PAGE 5]
                       CONTENTS


                       Introduction


    1. The Basics of the Graham Value Investing System

  2. The Principles of the Graham Value Investing System

                    3. Worldly Wisdom

        4. The Psychology of Human Misjudgment

                    5. The Right Stuff

6. The Seven Variables in the Graham Value Investing System

              7. The Right Stuff in a Business


                      Berkshire Math

                          Moats

            Value Investing vs. Factor Investing

                           Notes

                         Glossary

                       Bibliography

[PDF PAGE 6]
                              INTRODUCTION


CHARLIE MUNGER IS      one of the world’s most successful investors and most
interesting people. He is best known as the outspoken partner of Warren Buffett
at the fabulously successful company known as Berkshire Hathaway. Buffett
acknowledged Munger’s contributions when he pointed out, “One plus one with
Charlie and me certainly adds up to more than two.”1 Munger’s success as an
investor in businesses outside of Berkshire is also impressive. What is most
interesting about Munger is not his success as an investor but the way he thinks
and keeps his emotions under control.
   Munger’s ability to cut to the heart of an issue with a few well-chosen words
is legendary, as is his desire to think independently. A fundamentally important
truth about investing is that people rarely make decisions independently. This
means that people who can think independently, gain control of their emotions,
and avoid psychological errors have an advantage as investors. Buffett once
illustrated Munger’s desire to do his own thinking with this story:

     In 1985, a major investment banking house undertook to sell Scott Fetzer,
     offering it widely, but with no success. Upon reading of this strikeout, I
     wrote Ralph Schey, then and now Scott Fetzer’s CEO, expressing an
     interest in buying the business. I had never met Ralph, but within a week
     we had a deal. Unfortunately, Scott Fetzer’s letter of engagement with the
     banking firm provided it a 2.5 million dollar fee upon sale, even if it had
     nothing to do with finding the buyer. I guess the lead banker felt he should
     do something for his payment, so he graciously offered us a copy of the
     book on Scott Fetzer that his firm had prepared. With his customary tact,
     Charlie responded: I’ll give you 2.5 million “not” to read it.
                      —WARREN BUFFETT, CHAIRMAN’S LETTER, 1999


   Stories like this one, together with colorful reports on what Munger has said in
a range of settings, are a big part of what motivated me to write this book.
Munger is such an interesting person, in no small part because he is, in a word,
unrestrained. He says exactly what is on his mind, with little consideration given
to tact and social conventions. This candor is valuable because sometimes we

[PDF PAGE 7]
need to hear that the emperor is not wearing clothes. Munger has said that,
although he has accumulated an outstanding record as a stock picker and
accumulated substantial wealth, people should not emulate his example in life in
general. He believes his life has been too devoted to improving his own mind
and that peculiarities of his personality (including, but not limited to,
irreverence) will make people unpopular if they blindly follow his example.
   Munger recognizes that he is a lightning rod that may attract criticism on
some issues. Munger said once, “I may be remembered as a wise ass,” whereas
his investing partner Warren Buffett will be remembered as a teacher. People
sometimes say to me that they do not understand the fuss about Charlie Munger.
Unfortunately, they are missing a key point: no one can ever be Charlie Munger,
just like no one can be Warren Buffett. The point is not to treat anyone like a
hero, but rather to consider whether Munger, like his idol Benjamin Franklin,
may have qualities, attributes, systems, or approaches to life that we might want
to emulate, even in part. This same process explains why Munger has read
hundreds of biographies. Learning from the success and failure of others is the
fastest way to get smarter and wiser without a lot of pain.
   Despite his irreverence, Munger is a teacher in his own inimitable way. He
said once:

     The best thing a human being can do is help another human being know
     more.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2010


   Much of what is interesting about Munger is explained by this simple
sentence: “I observe what works and what doesn’t and why.” Life happens to
Munger as it does to everyone, but unlike many people he thinks deeply about
why things happen and works hard to learn from the experience.
   Like Warren Buffett, Munger was born and raised in Omaha, Nebraska. He
studied mathematics at the University of Michigan, but his path toward a college
degree there was interrupted by World War II. During the war he served as a
meteorologist in the U.S. military, receiving his training at the California
Institute of Technology. After the war ended he was able to secure a place at
Harvard Law School without an undergraduate degree. He learned to like
California during his time at Cal Tech, and after law school he proceeded to form
with a few partners what would become one of the nation’s most prestigious law
firms. Despite that success, he soon left the legal profession to invest on a full-
time basis at the urging of Warren Buffett, whom he did not meet until after he
was living in Pasadena, California. Between 1962 and 1975, Munger ran a

[PDF PAGE 8]
partnership for a group of investors, which generated annual financial returns of
nearly 20 percent, compared to a less than 5 percent return for the Dow Jones
industrial average during the same period. Munger does not collect Ferraris or
have a huge mansion. In many aspects of his life that do not involve ideas or
investing, Munger is quite ordinary despite being a billionaire.
   While Munger has delivered numerous speeches, written essays, and
entertained legions of shareholders at Wesco Financial and Berkshire Hathaway
annual meetings, his ideas have not yet been presented in a form that might be
called a unified theory. This is probably because Munger’s mind is capable of
feats that are too hard for people of more conventional intelligence. For ordinary
people, simultaneously juggling what he calls “multiple models” in their head is
not an easy task without an understandable framework for the ideas. The intent
of this book is to teach you how to think more like Charlie Munger.
   How did I find my way to the ideas of Munger? The genesis of this book can
be traced to the period immediately before the collapse of the Internet bubble.
Many assumptions about investing were being questioned during this time. The
wealth created during the Internet bubble was unreal to anyone paying attention.
Marc Andreessen expressed it well when he said on Twitter that during this
bubble, “the overwhelming feeling people had was panic—that they were
missing out.” What was going on seemed to be mass insanity, but most people
thought to themselves, “What if it’s real? What if value doubled or tripled
again?” It was natural for anyone who, like me, was seeking answers about what
was going on in the markets during this crazy period to read the views of
successful and thoughtful investors.
   To cope with what was going on in the markets, in the summer of 1999 I
chartered a boat, hired a skipper, and told him to take my family to the San Juan
Islands in Washington state. I took everything that had ever been written by and
about Buffett with me on that trip. As I read Buffett’s investing methods sitting
on the deck of that boat, I found that it was actually Munger’s ideas that
resonated most with me. The specific question I most wanted answered at that
time was how much of my stock in highly appreciated Internet and
telecommunications companies I should sell. My family had a blast on the boat
and the islands while I read and paced back and forth on the deck deep in
thought. I did little else for a week but read and think; I was not a lot of fun on
that trip. However, as the trip drew to a close, I had reached my conclusion: I
would sell exactly half my Internet and telecom stocks. I decided that this would
minimize regret, no matter what happened. It was not an optimal decision given
the crash that followed, but I was happy with my decision then and remain so
today. That trip was the start of my deep dive into value investing.

[PDF PAGE 9]
   The value investing system developed by Ben Graham and used by Munger is
the single best way for an ordinary investor to outperform a market index. While
Graham value investing is a system, it is not possible for an investor following
this approach to find success simply by following a set of rigid rules. The
implementation of the Graham value investing system, the Berkshire system, or
the systems of other value investors is an art, not a science. Value investing is
not a connect-the-dots exercise. While fully understanding the Graham value
investing system does not involve rocket science, most people will find that they
either do not have the emotional and psychological control required or do not
want to do the work necessary to outperform a market index. This is why Warren
Buffett likes to say that “investing is simple, but not easy.”2 Munger’s version of
what Buffett said is: “Take a simple idea and take it seriously.”
   Much of this book is about how I have learned to better identify sources of
emotional and psychological mistakes and what I learned from Munger about
avoiding them. Wall Street Journal columnist Jason Zweig described one of the
essential challenges in investing in an email to me:

     If it was easy to be like him and think like him, then there wouldn’t be just
     one Charlie Munger. Turning oneself into a learning machine with multiple
     mental models … is very hard work, and the few people who succeed at
     doing it may still fail to benefit from it if they don’t have the right
     temperament. This is why both Buffett and Munger keep going back to
     Graham: Being a true contrarian takes supreme courage and implacable
     calm. Buffett talks constantly about the “emotional framework” Graham
     provides; Charlie often says that most investors, no matter how smart,
     won’t succeed because they have “the wrong temperament.” I like to use a
     word from ancient Greek philosophy to describe this: ataraxia, or perfect
     imperturbability. You see it when Socrates goes on trial, when Nathan Hale
     is hanged, when Buffett invests in Goldman and when Charlie buys Wells
     Fargo the day before the bottom tick in March 2009.
                    —JASON ZWEIG, EMAIL TO AUTHOR, OCTOBER 2014


  To help myself better understand Munger’s ideas and methods that relate
specifically to investing, I created a framework composed of three elements:
principles, the right stuff, and variables. This three-part framework is only one
type of model that can be used to understand Munger’s ideas and methods about
investing. Other approaches to understanding Munger can be just as useful. My
other intent in creating this framework was to create a checklist that can be used
in investing. Munger is a strong proponent of a checklist approach to life’s

[PDF PAGE 10]
challenges:

     I’m a great believer in solving hard problems by using a checklist. You need
     to get all the likely and unlikely answers before you; otherwise it’s easy to
     miss something important.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2007


   Part of the benefit of creating a checklist is the process of writing down your
ideas. I have always loved the point Buffett made about the importance of
making the effort to actually put your ideas in writing. In Buffett’s view, if you
cannot write it down, you have not thought it through.
   To best fulfill the promise of a book entitled Charlie Munger: The Complete
Investor, it is essential to start out with a discussion of Graham value investing
fundamentals because that will help convey an outline of where this book is
going. The four fundamental principles of value investing as created by Ben
Graham are as follows:

 1. Treat a share of stock as a proportional ownership of the business.
 2. Buy at a significant discount to intrinsic value to create a margin of safety.
 3. Make a bipolar Mr. Market your servant rather than your master.
 4. Be rational, objective, and dispassionate.

   Munger has said these four bedrock Graham principles “will never be
obsolete.” An investor who does not follow these principles is not a Graham
value investor. The Graham value investing system really is that simple.
   Munger also believes the development and recognition of certain personal
attributes are essential for a Graham value investor. These attributes represent
“the right stuff” part of my framework. Munger believes that investors who can
develop these attributes can train themselves to avoid common psychological
and emotional mistakes and become successful investors. No one is ever going
to be anything approaching perfect, but we can all get better over time. If we do
not work constantly to improve these attributes, Munger believes, we can relapse
into old mistakes and folly.
   The final section of the book will discuss choices that a Graham value
investor can make in establishing his or her own investing style and
methodology. In other words, variations on the Graham value investing system
can be created on top of the four fundamental value investing principles. No two
Graham value investors are exactly alike in how their investing system is
implemented. As just one example, Buffett has pointed out that while he and

[PDF PAGE 11]
Munger are “Siamese twins, practically,”3 they do have some differences in their
approaches to investing.
   The learning and teaching opportunities related to investing are essentially
unlimited. Munger likes to say that a successful investor never stops being a
“learning machine.” This need to learn and relearn means that an investor must
read and think constantly. Munger has said he does not know a single successful
investor who does not read voraciously. His own children describe him as a
“book with legs sticking out.” Reading and learning will require some real work.
There is a Zen saying that can be made applicable to this point: “In matters
related to value investing, many people prefer chewing the menu to actually
eating the food.” I have learned not only to do the work but to love the work
because it is intellectually satisfying. You can learn to at least enjoy the process
—and maybe even love it too.
   Before concluding this introduction, I should make a few points about the
book itself. Its format is simple. Quotations from Munger have been set out in a
logical order, typically followed by an explanation that I have written. Unless
otherwise indicated, the quotation is something Munger has said. There is a
glossary in the back of the book, so if you read a term you are not familiar with
(e.g., net present value), you have a definition at hand.
   The best way to teach people about how Munger thinks is to examine the
dominant professional activity of his life in some depth. This book’s focus is on
how Munger thinks as an investor. Munger has called being a successful investor
a “trained response.” He believes that if you can learn to overcome behavior that
drives poor decisions, you can gain an edge over other investors. Much of the
context of the book will be about how Munger invests, but the discussion is just
as applicable to making decisions in other aspects of life. By understanding the
framework that supports Munger’s ideas and methods, each of his individual
public statements has even more meaning. For example, by learning about what
he calls worldly wisdom and the psychology of human misjudgment, you can
make better decisions. Learning about Munger’s ideas and methods will forever
change the way you think about investing and about life. You will make better
decisions, be happier, and live a more fulfilling life.

[PDF PAGE 12]
                                        1
THE BASICS OF THE GRAHAM VALUE INVESTING
                  SYSTEM


LET’S GET STARTED with the most fundamental questions: what is the Graham
value investing system, and who can benefit from it?

     [Ben Graham] was trying to invent a system anybody could use.
        —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA (USC) BUSINESS
                                  SCHOOL, 1994


   The critical point about Graham’s system is that it is simple. Too many people
take a situation and create complexity where none is needed. Take, for example,
the old joke about unnecessary complexity at the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA). The storyteller starts by saying that early in the
space program NASA discovered that ballpoint pens would not work in zero
gravity. NASA scientists spent a decade and huge amounts of money developing
a pen that wrote not only in zero gravity but on almost any surface, at extremely
low temperatures, and in any position of the astronaut. The punch line is: the
Russians instead used a pencil. Graham value investing has the inherent
simplicity of the pencil.
   Munger believes that Ben Graham developed his value investing system to be
relatively simple to understand and implement and thus valuable to an ordinary
person. Graham value investing is not the only way to actively invest or
speculate. For example, venture capital and private equity are very different
approaches to investing from value investing, but Munger believes that these
alternative active investing systems are not as accessible to the ordinary investor
as Graham value investing is. So-called index-based (or passive) approaches to
investing will be discussed shortly.
   Warren Buffett says that investing is simple but not easy. When Graham value
investors make mistakes, it is usually because they have done things that are
hard for humans to avoid, like forgetting the inherent simplicity of the Graham
value investing system, deviating from the fundamentals of the system, or
making psychological or emotional mistakes related to implementation of the

[PDF PAGE 13]
system.
   Because investing is a probabilistic activity, decisions made in ways that are
fundamentally sound may sometimes produce bad results. Sometimes a person
will produce an unfavorable result even when his or her process is well
constructed and executed. However, in the long run, it is always wise to focus on
following the right process over any specific, intermediate outcome. Munger
believes that when creating a successful investing process, complexity is not the
investor’s friend.

     We have a passion for keeping things simple.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


   Peter Bevelin’s book Seeking Wisdom: From Darwin to Munger has a section
on the importance of simplicity. Bevelin advised: “Turn complicated problems
into simple ones. Break down a problem into its components, but look at the
problem holistically.”1 Keeping things as simple as possible, but no more so, is a
constant theme in Munger’s public statements. In a joint letter to shareholders,
Munger and Buffett once wrote: “Simplicity has a way of improving
performance through enabling us to better understand what we are doing.”2
   By focusing on finding decisions and bets that are easy, avoiding what is hard,
and stripping away anything that is extraneous, Munger believes that an investor
can make better decisions. By “tuning out folly” and swatting away unimportant
things “so your mind isn’t cluttered with them … you’re better able to pick up a
few sensible things to do,” said Munger.3 Focus enables both simplicity and
clarity of thought, which in Munger’s view leads to a more positive investing
result.

     If something is too hard, we move on to something else. What could be
     simpler than that?
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2006


     We have three baskets: in, out, and too tough. … We have to have a special
     insight, or we’ll put it in the “too tough” basket.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


   The Graham value investing system is designed to remove from the process
any decisions that may lead an investor to make mistakes. The “yes” basket is
tiny compared to the other two baskets because an investing decision that results
in a “yes” will happen rarely.

[PDF PAGE 14]
   Not all companies can be accurately valued using a Graham value investing
process. It is perfectly natural for a person who follows the Graham system to
acknowledge that fact and move on to other easy decisions. It is often
disorienting to some people that a Graham value investor would admit to not
knowing how to accurately value a company. Munger made this point with an
analogy:

     Confucius said that real knowledge is knowing the extent of one’s
     ignorance. Aristotle and Socrates said the same thing. Is it a skill that can be
     taught or learned? It probably can, if you have enough of a stake riding on
     the outcome. Some people are extraordinarily good at knowing the limits of
     their knowledge, because they have to be. Think of somebody who’s been a
     professional tightrope walker for 20 years—and has survived. He couldn’t
     survive as a tightrope walker for 20 years unless he knows exactly what he
     knows and what he doesn’t know. He’s worked so hard at it, because he
     knows if he gets it wrong he won’t survive. The survivors know.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, JASON ZWEIG INTERVIEW, 2014


   Graham value investing is not about showboating or flouting one’s
intelligence. Instead, it is about doing things that are not likely to result in a
mistake.
   The successful Graham value investor also works diligently to reduce the
downside risk of any investment. For this reason, the Graham value investing
system tends to shine most brightly during a flat or falling stock market. The
Graham value investing system is intentionally designed to underperform an
index in a bull market; this is confusing to many people. The underperformance
of the Graham value investing system during a bull market is an essential part of
this style of investing. By giving up some of the upside in a bull market, the
Graham value investor is able to outperform when the market is flat or down.
Consider what Seth Klarman wrote in Margin of Safety: “Most investors are
primarily oriented toward return, how much they can make and pay little
attention to risk, how much they can lose.”4 He added, “The payoff from a risk-
averse, long-term orientation is—just that—long term.”5
   Here is a story to further illustrate this point. An investor was walking in a
park one day when she saw a frog sitting on a log at the edge of a pond. The frog
looked right at her and said, “Excuse me, would you happen to be an investor?”
   The investor replied, “Yes, I am. Why do you ask?”
   “Well,” replied the frog, “I am a stock speculator. My best client did not like
my investing results so he put a spell on me and now I am a frog. The spell can

[PDF PAGE 15]
be broken if an investor will kiss me.”
   The investor immediately reached over and picked up the frog, put him in her
purse, and then started to walk home. The frog was concerned that he was not
receiving a kiss and asked, “What are you doing? When do I get my kiss?”
   The investor replied, “I’m not kissing you ever. You’re worth a lot more to me
as a talking frog than as a stock speculator.”
   If you cannot accept investing underperformance in the short term in order to
achieve long-term investment outperformance, then you are not a candidate for
Graham value investing. This is not a tragedy, since the Graham value investing
system is not the only way to invest successfully. It is important to note that the
goal of the Graham value investor is superior absolute performance, not just
relative performance. An investor cannot spend the output of relative
performance, only actual performance.
   Failing conventionally is not the goal of the Graham value investor. Munger’s
approach is to invert the methods of most people:

     It’s remarkable how much long-term advantage people like us have gotten
     by trying to be consistently not stupid, instead of trying to be very
     intelligent. There must be some wisdom in the folk saying, “It’s the strong
     swimmers who drown.”
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL REPORT, 1989


     What’s the flip side, what can go wrong that I haven’t seen?
                            —CHARLIE MUNGER, FORBES, 1969


   Munger’s inclination to invert the usual approach to solving a problem is
clearly evident when it comes to investing. In his view, investors will do better
financially simply by being less stupid. One core idea Munger has borrowed
from algebra is that many problems are best addressed backward. For example,
by avoiding stupidity, a person can often discover what he or she wants through
subtraction. By eliminating the stupid paths that one can take in life, a person
can find the best way forward, even given inevitable risk, uncertainty, and
ignorance. Not only does one often know a lot more about what is wrong than
what is right, but disproving something may also require only one observation.
In short, Munger’s view is that being smart is often best achieved by not being
stupid. Once, in an interview with Jason Zweig, Munger said it simply:
“Knowing what you don’t know is more useful than being brilliant.”
   Munger strives to find investments for which a significantly positive outcome
is obvious. Because this type of investment is identified only rarely, Munger

[PDF PAGE 16]
suggests that one be very patient but also very ready to aggressively invest when
the time is right. To use a baseball analogy, Munger knows there are no called
strikes in investing, so there is no need to swing at every pitch. When you find
an obvious bet with a big upside, Munger’s advice is simple: bet big!

     All the equity investors, in total, will surely bear a performance
     disadvantage per annum equal to the total croupiers’ costs they have jointly
     elected to bear. This is an inescapable fact of life. And it is also inescapable
     that exactly half of the investors will get a result below the median result
     after the croupiers’ take, which median result may well be somewhere
     between unexciting and lousy.
                      —CHARLIE MUNGER, PHILANTHROPY, APRIL 1999


   The point Munger makes immediately above about investing as a less-than-
zero sum game after fees and expenses is mathematically irrefutable. John
Bogle, the founder of the nonprofit mutual fund provider Vanguard, is perhaps
the most successful person to ever evangelize this simple idea. Bogle wrote, “In
many areas of the market, there will be a loser for every winner, so, on average,
investors will get the return of that market less fees.”6 Columbia Business School
professor, investor, and author Bruce Greenwald had his own take on this point,
which I find compelling:

     Only in Woebegone can people out-invest the market. The average
     performance of all investors has to be the average performance of all assets.
     It’s a zero-sum game if you judge it relative to the market. There are two
     sides to every trade. The best way to think about it is that every time you
     buy a stock, someone is selling … So you always have to ask the question,
     “Why am I on the right side of this trade?”
                   —BRUCE GREENWALD, BETTERMENT INTERVIEW, 2013


  Graham value investing would not work if markets were perfectly efficient.
For this reason, the market’s folly is the fundamental source of the Graham value
investor’s opportunity.
  Munger’s take on why investing is hard is simple:

     The idea that everyone can have wonderful results from stocks is inherently
     crazy. Nobody expects everyone to succeed at poker.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAILY JOURNAL MEETING, 2013

[PDF PAGE 17]
     If [investing] weren’t a little difficult, everybody would be rich.
                          —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAMN RIGHT, 2000


     For a security to be mispriced, someone else must be a damn fool. It may be
     bad for the world, but not bad for Berkshire.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2008


   Because the degree to which investors may collectively act like “damn fools”
varies over time, opportunities to generate investment gains will inevitably
arrive in a lumpy fashion. Successful Graham value investors spend most of
their time reading and thinking, waiting for significant folly to inevitably raise
its head. Although Graham value investors are bullish about the market in the
long term, they do not make investing decisions based on short-term predictions
about stocks or markets. When confronted with this idea, people will often ask,
“Do you mean Graham value investors wait for mispriced assets to appear rather
than predict the future in the short term?” The answer is an emphatic yes! The
Graham value investor’s job is to recognize mispriced assets when he or she sees
them. This approach is hard for many people to accept. At the core of the system
is the idea that the investor must let go of his or her desire to make short-term
predictions about the future. Some people just can’t do that. Klarman wrote:

     The value discipline seems simple enough but is apparently a difficult one
     for most investors to grasp or adhere to. As Buffett has often observed,
     value investing is not a concept that can be learned and applied gradually
     over time. It is either absorbed or adopted at once, or it is never truly
     learned.
                        —SETH KLARMAN, MARGIN OF SAFETY, 1991


   As will be explained, the time of greatest activity for a Graham value investor
is when the people who make up the market are fearful as evidenced by
mispriced assets available for purchase. It is ironically because of downturns in
markets that the Graham value investor finds his or her greatest source of profits.
   Munger pointed this out:

     Most people who try [investing] don’t do well at it. But the trouble is that if
     even 90 percent are no good, everyone looks around and says, “I’m the 10
     percent.”
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2004

[PDF PAGE 18]
   This aspect of human nature can be a troubling fact for a financial planner. Is
it dangerous to tell a client that beating the market is possible even if you know
that there is little chance that this person will actually do so? It may not be
dangerous in and of itself, but it certainly creates substantial risk. The following
is common yet perfectly good advice about investing and is true in most cases:

     It’s not possible for investors to consistently outperform the market.
     Therefore you’re best served investing in a diversified portfolio of low-cost
     index funds [or exchange-traded funds].

   Although this advice is mostly true, it is provably false in the case of investors
like Charlie Munger, Warren Buffett, Seth Klarman, Howard Marks, Bill Ruane,
and other Graham value investors. Munger once said, “The top 3 or 4 percent of
the investment management world will do fine.”7 The fact that Munger has
outperformed the market does not necessarily mean that you can; however, it
does mean that it is possible for some people to accomplish. Munger said the
following about the Graham value investing system:

     It’s a very simple set of ideas and the reason that our ideas have not spread
     faster is they’re too simple. The professional classes can’t justify their
     existence if that’s all they have to say.
                        —CHARLIE MUNGER, BBC INTERVIEW, 2009


  Successfully learning and especially implementing the Graham value
investing system is what Munger has called “a trained response.” You must learn
to overcome certain behavior that drives poor decisions. If you can do that
successfully, Munger believes you can create an investing edge over other
investors. Part of that trained response is to avoid distracting noise made by
people who do not understand investing or who have a financial interest in
keeping you from understanding investing. The task is made vastly harder by
people who generate their income by making the investing process overly
complex and harvesting their living from the psychological and emotional
dysfunctions of investors. Munger told a story about the incentives of investment
managers that is instructive:

     I think the reason why we got into such idiocy in investment management is
     best illustrated by a story that I tell about the guy who sold fishing tackle. I
     asked him, “My God, they’re purple and green. Do fish really take these
     lures?” And he said, “Mister, I don’t sell to fish.”

[PDF PAGE 19]
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   It can be hard for some people to make a living selling you something that is
simple, but it is the best approach for the investor. Fortunately, the function of
financial planning is being separated from the process of managing money. A
financial planner provides the greatest value for clients simply by helping
investors keep their emotional and psychological dysfunctions under control. If
this behavior modification is effective, the financial planner will employ a range
of techniques to help you not be your own worst enemy. In some cases, intense
competition has started to reduce fees and increase transparency in financial
planning and money management businesses. This competition has caused many
financial planners to focus on more valuable services for customers, such as
retirement and estate planning; some fees for money managers have come down
as well.
   Munger’s advice is simple for people who decide that they should not try to
outperform markets:

     Our standard prescription for the know-nothing investor with a long-term
     time horizon is a no-load index fund.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER INTERVIEW, 2005


  Who is a “know-nothing” investor? The answer is simple for Munger: a
know-nothing investor is someone who does not understand fundamentals of
investing. Here is a simple suggestion from Seth Klarman for no-nothing
investors: “If you can’t beat the market, be the market.”8
  Buffett agreed: “By periodically investing in an index fund, for example, the
know-nothing investor can actually outperform most investment professionals.
Paradoxically, when ‘dumb’ money acknowledges its limitations, it ceases to be
dumb.”9 What Buffett was talking about is the question of whether a person
should be an active or a passive investor—concepts he learned from Benjamin
Graham.
  Passive investors are not completely passive because they still have choices to
make. For example, passive investors must make asset allocation decisions (i.e.,
which types of investments to make) and determine what types of indexes to use
within those asset classes. When making these choices, investors can still make
emotional and psychological errors.
  Even though passive investors must make some decisions, they are called
passive because they do not make as many decisions as active investors. A better
approach is perhaps to call these passive investors index investors. If a person is

[PDF PAGE 20]
investing in a diversified portfolio of index funds and exchange-traded funds
(ETFs), then he is an index investor. If a person is picking individual stocks and
other securities, then she is an active investor. Many people engage in a mix of
active and index investing. For example, some index funds are tweaked and
include some choices about factors that can improve their performance. This
factor style of index investing is discussed in the last section of this book: Value
Investing vs. Factor Investing.
   Being an active investor and somehow outperforming the market after fees
and expenses may sound good to you. However, being a successful active
investor requires massive amounts of time and work, plus the right emotional
temperament. If you do not enjoy it, why do it? William Bernstein wrote:

     Successful investors … must possess an interest in the process. It’s no
     different from carpentry, gardening, or parenting. If money management is
     not enjoyable, then a lousy job inevitably results, and, unfortunately, most
     people enjoy finance about as much as they do root canal work.
                  —WILLIAM BERNSTEIN, THE INVESTOR’S MANIFESTO, 2012


   In any event, investors must still make several key investing decisions, and
understanding the ideas and methods of Munger will help them do so more
successfully. Columbia Business School professor Bruce Greenwald summed up
the challenge as follows: “Emotions are absolutely your enemy. You want to be a
certain kind of mutant who is just completely different in their orientation to
what’s an attractive investment for the rest of the market.”10 Can you be the
mutant that Professor Greenwald described?
   As you read this book, think about whether you have the right stuff required to
be a successful Graham value investor like Munger. Can you understand and
implement the principles to make the required choices about value investing
variables? It may well be that you find the whole investment process too boring
to do it well enough to beat the market. You may conclude that you’re too easily
distracted, are likely to panic at the wrong time, or will too often follow the
crowd into poorly performing investments. If you cannot be an effective Graham
value investor or don’t want to put in the effort required to do so, invest in a
diversified portfolio of low-cost index funds and ETFs.
   Some investors knowingly do a small amount of active investing for fun,
much as they might gamble in Las Vegas. This can be logical as long as people
remember that gambling is, well, gambling. Knowing the difference between
gambling and investing is important. Investing is an action that defers
consumption in the present in the hope that you will be able to consume more in

[PDF PAGE 21]
the future. An investor has an expectation of a positive real rate of return, even
though it is possible that this will not happen (especially in the short term). In
other words, an investment is a net present value–positive activity (the likelihood
of the net present value of the potential benefits minus the likelihood net present
value of the potential losses is positive). Gambling is a form of present-moment
consumption, and the net present long-term value of the activity is negative.
Many people who think they are investing are actually gambling.
   Some people try to outperform the market by saying essentially, “I can be
smart about picking other people who will outperform the market via active
investing.” Munger believes that if something related to active investing is worth
doing, then it is worth doing yourself. Munger has said on this point:

     I think you’ll at least make fewer mistakes than people who think they can
     do anything, no matter how complex, by just hiring somebody with a
     credible label. You don’t have to hire out your thinking if you keep it
     simple.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 1994


   What Munger meant is that outsourcing active investing to others, such as
investment managers and brokers, is harder than doing it yourself. One way of
doing it yourself is by buying a diversified portfolio or index funds/ETFs.
Unfortunately, this approach is not enough to achieve financial success because
investors must still make important investment choices; they will too often
“chase performance” by buying into funds/ETFs when the market is high and
selling when the market is low. If index investors did not need to make some
choices, there would not be a behavior gap of approximately 2 percent between
investors and the investing funds they buy. In other words, even if you choose to
be an index investor and buy a low-cost portfolio of funds/ETFs, you still need
to develop the trained response that will enable you to overcome the behavioral
biases that can lead to making mistakes. What Munger teaches about investing is
applicable in its own way to index investors. The ideas and methods described in
this book are still very important for an index investor.

[PDF PAGE 22]
                                        2
      THE PRINCIPLES OF THE GRAHAM VALUE
               INVESTING SYSTEM


     The number one idea is to view a stock as an ownership of the business.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD LAW BULLETIN, 2001



     Understanding how to be a good investor makes you a better business
     manager and vice versa.
                          —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER, 2005



  First Principle: Treat a Share of Stock as a Proportional Ownership of a
                                   Business

THIS FIRST PRINCIPLE of the Graham value investing system is the foundation on
which any valuation must begin. Put simply: if you do not understand the actual
business of the company, you cannot understand the value of assets related to
that business, like a share of stock or a bond. Graham value investors approach
any valuation as if they were actually buying a business in a private transaction.
In buying a business, Munger believes the place to start is at the bottom, with
business fundamentals, and work up. What does the company sell and who are
its customers and competitors? What are the key numbers that represent the
value the business generates? The list of important questions that an investor
must answer is extensive. For a true Graham value investor, there is no substitute
for a bottom-up valuation process. In undertaking this process, Graham value
investors are focused on the present value of the cash that will flow from the
business during its lifetime and whether the business generates high, sustained,
and consistent returns on capital. Many supplemental variations on this process
exist, but the fundamental core of the valuation process is the same for all
Graham value investors.
   Effective Graham value investors are like great detectives. They are constantly
looking for bottom-up clues about what has happened in the past and, more

[PDF PAGE 23]
importantly, what is happening now. Graham value investors like Munger stay
away from making predictions about how cash flows will change in the future
based on projections and forecasts. What Munger looks for is a business that has
a significant track record of generating high, sustained, and consistent financial
returns. If valuing the business requires understanding how cash flows will
change in the future based on factors like rapid technological change, Munger
puts that business in the too hard pile and moves on to value other companies.
Munger makes it quite clear that he does not have a way to value all companies,
which is fine with him because he feels no need to do so. There are more than
enough businesses that Munger can value using his valuation method to make
him happy as an investor.
   The key to understanding this first principle is understanding that Munger
believes that a share of stock cannot be divorced from the fundamentals of the
specific business. Munger’s response to people who doubt his approach can be
phrased as a question: if a share of stock is not a partial stake in a business, what
exactly is it? Jason Zweig of the Wall Street Journal, who is a hero to Graham
value investors, wrote that “a stock is not just a ticker symbol or an electronic
blip; it’s an ownership interest in an actual business, with an underlying value
that does not depend on its share price.”1 For a Graham value investor, a share of
IBM stock is just a small share of IBM’s overall business. Munger believes that
treating shares of a company as if they should be valued like baseball cards is a
loser’s game because it requires that you predict the behavior of often irrational
and emotional herds of human beings. A Graham value investor puts short-term
predictions about mass psychology in the too hard pile and focuses on what he
or she can do successfully with far greater ease. Graham value investors do not
spend time with top-down factors like monetary policy, consumer confidence,
durable goods orders, and market sentiment in doing a business valuation or
investing.

     Be motivated when you’re buying and selling securities by reference to
     intrinsic value instead of price momentum.
                          —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAMN RIGHT, 2000


   As Ben Graham once pointed out, “It’s an almost unbelievable fact that Wall
Street never asks: how much is the business selling for?”2
   That a famous Graham value investor like Munger or Buffett may make a
statement about current economic conditions or market indicators does not mean
that they purchase stocks based on that view or that they think they can make
successful predictions about what the macroeconomy might do in the short term.

[PDF PAGE 24]
Famous Graham value investors may also make positive statements in the press
and at conferences about the future state of the economy in the long term.
However, that does not mean they make investments based on those forecasts.
There is a huge difference between what is interesting to learn about and what is
useful in making an investment decision. For example, both Munger and Buffett
are famously bullish on the U.S. economy in the long term, but that does not
mean they make short-term predictions about the economy or incorporate them
into investment decision making.
   Munger is adamant about many points, including this core belief: you must
value the business in order to value the stock. Graham value investors price
assets based on their value to a private investor now (based on data from the
present and past) rather than making predictions about markets in the future. If
you focus on the value of the business, you have no need to predict short-term
changes in the economy because that takes care of itself. When stocks are a
bargain, people are fearful; when stocks are expensive, people are greedy.

     Crowd folly, the tendency of humans, under some circumstances, to
     resemble lemmings, explains much foolish thinking of brilliant men and
     much foolish behavior.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, PHILANTHROPY ROUNDTABLE, 2000


If you do not follow the business to value the stock approach, in the view of
Graham value investors, you are a speculator and not an investor. If you are an
investor, you are trying to understand the value of the asset. By contrast, a
speculator is trying to guess the price of the asset by predicting the behavior of
others in the future. In other words, a speculator’s objective is to make
predictions about the psychology of large masses of people, which if you are
both smart and experienced is a sobering thought. How good are you at
predicting what people will do once assembled into a mob? The big danger
related to this tendency is that you just end up following the crowd and doing
what Munger talked about here:

     Mimicking the herd invites regression to the mean (merely average
     performance).
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK, 2005


   When speculators spend their time trying to guess what other speculators are
trying to guess, the process quickly becomes both circular and absurd. Graham
value investors do not treat a share of stock or a bond as a piece of paper to be

[PDF PAGE 25]
traded back and forth. They also do not spend any time looking at technical
charts of stock price movements, searching for things like double bottoms or
Hindenburg omens. The financial performance of speculators is, in a word,
dismal, especially after fees, costs, and taxes. Even when speculators are right, it
is almost inevitable that they are correct only once in a while. Too often,
investors confuse luck with skill.
   Munger is a firm believer in the Ben Graham view that “an investment
operation is one which, upon thorough analysis, promises safety of principal and
an adequate return. Operations not meeting these requirements are speculative.”3
Buffett has his own version:

     If you’re an investor, you’re looking on what the asset is going to do; if
     you’re a speculator, you’re commonly focusing on what the price of the
     object is going to do, and that’s not our game.
                 —WARREN BUFFETT, OUTSTANDING INVESTOR DIGEST, 1997


   If you always bet with the crowd, you cannot beat the market—especially
after fees, costs, and taxes. To outperform the market, sometimes you must be a
contrarian, and you must be right on enough of those occasions when you’re a
contrarian.
   For example, people who day-trade stocks using charts of past prices and
other voodoo-like practices are speculators. You will hear them talk about how
the market behaves rather than what the value of a given stock may be. A guess
about market behavior based on a chart is just that—a guess! Speculators are
focused on price, whether it may be an old baseball card or a share of stock.
Graham value investors have a very different view than speculators. Seth
Klarman wrote that “technical analysis is based on the presumption that past
share price meanderings, rather than underlying business value, hold the key to
future stock prices.”4
   Buffet used a story to illustrate the dangers of herd behavior in one of his
Chairman’s letters:

     Ben Graham told a story forty years ago that illustrates why investment
     professionals behave as they do. An oil prospector, moving to his heavenly
     reward, was met by St. Peter with bad news. “You’re qualified for
     residence,” said St. Peter, “but, as you can see, the compound reserved for
     oil men is packed. There’s no way to squeeze you in.” After thinking a
     moment, the prospector asked if he might say just four words to the present
     occupants. That seemed harmless to St. Peter, so the prospector cupped his

[PDF PAGE 26]
     hands and yelled, “Oil discovered in hell.” Immediately, the gate to the
     compound opened and all of the oil men marched out to head for the nether
     regions. Impressed, St. Peter invited the prospector to move in and make
     himself comfortable. The prospector paused. “No,” he said, “I think I’ll go
     along with the rest of the boys. There might be some truth to that rumor
     after all.”
                                —WARREN BUFFETT, 1985


   John Maynard Keynes defined speculation as “the activity of forecasting the
psychology of the market.”5 Keynes went on to say that the speculator must
think about what others are thinking about, what others are thinking about the
market (and repeat). In what is now called a “Keynesian beauty contest,” judges
are told not to pick the most beautiful woman but instead to pick the contestant
they think the other judges will choose as the most beautiful. The winner of such
a contest may be very different than the winner of a traditional beauty contest.
Keynes said this about such a contest:

     It’s not a case of choosing those [faces] that, to the best of one’s judgment,
     are really the prettiest, nor even those that average opinion genuinely thinks
     the prettiest. We have reached the third degree where we devote our
     intelligences to anticipating what average opinion expects the average
     opinion to be. And there are some, I believe, who practice the fourth, fifth
     and higher degrees.
                    —JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES, GENERAL THEORY, 1936


   How some promoters have learned how to manipulate this process can be
illustrated with a story: Once upon a time, a man and his assistant arrived in a
very small town and spread the word to the townspeople that the man was
willing to buy monkeys for $100 each. The people knew there were many
monkeys in the nearby forest and immediately started catching them. Thousands
of monkeys were bought at a price of $100 and placed in a large cage.
Unfortunately for the townspeople, the supply of monkeys quickly diminished to
a point where it took many hours to catch even one.
   When the new man announced he would now buy monkeys at a price of $200
per monkey, the town’s resident’s redoubled their efforts to catch monkeys. But
after a few days the monkeys were so hard to find that the townspeople stopped
trying to catch any more. The man responded by announcing that he would buy
monkeys at $500 after he returned with additional cash from a trip to the big city.
   While the man was gone, his assistant told the villagers one by one: “I will

[PDF PAGE 27]
secretly sell you my boss’ monkeys for $350, and when he returns from the city,
you can sell them to him for $500 each.”
   The villagers bought every single monkey, and they never saw the man or his
assistant ever again.
   Howard Marks advised that Graham value investors focus on what they know
now and not where they are going because, rather obviously, your data about the
present is extensive while your data about the future will always be zero. Like
Marks in making investment decisions, Munger is focused on what is happening
in a given business right now. Projections about the future are scrupulously
avoided. Buffett put it this way: “I have no use whatsoever for projections or
forecasts. They create an illusion of apparent precision. The more meticulous
they are, the more concerned you should be. We never look at projections but we
care very much about, and look very deeply, at track records. If a company has a
lousy track record but a very bright future, we will miss the opportunity.”6
Munger agreed:

     [Projections] are put together by people who have an interest in a particular
     outcome, have a subconscious bias, and its apparent precision makes it
     fallacious. They remind me of Mark Twain’s saying, “A mine is a hole in
     the ground owned by a liar.” Projections in America are often a lie,
     although not an intentional one, but the worst kind because the forecaster
     often believes them himself.
                        —CHARLIE MUNGER, BUFFETT SPEAKS, 2007


     I don’t let others do projections for me, because I don’t like throwing up on
     the desk.
          —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, SANTA BARBARA, 2003


   There is a riddle about people who make short-term forecasts that I have heard
many times: Charlie Munger, the Easter Bunny, Superman, and a successful
forecaster of an investment bank find themselves in their own corner of a large
square-shaped trading floor. In the center of the room is a large stack of $100
bills. If each of them starts racing toward the center of the floor at the same time,
who gets the money? The answer is Munger, because the other three don’t exist!
   By sticking to investing activities that are easy, avoiding questions that are
hard, and making decisions based on data that actually exists now, the Graham
value investor greatly increases his or her probability of success. Understanding
the present is unsurprisingly easier if you know what you are doing and the
underlying business is understandable. One must be careful because there are

[PDF PAGE 28]
many promoters who can successfully use techniques like “predicting the
present” to convey the impression that they can be successful speculators.
Predicting the present is, of course, infinitely easier than predicting the future.
Consider the following illustrative story about an investor encountering a
forecaster. A man piloting a hot-air balloon discovered he had travelled far off
course. He took the balloon down to a lower altitude, where he saw that he was
above an office building. A man outside the building saw the balloonist and
waved.
   The balloonist shouted, “Excuse me, can you tell me where I am?”
   The man yelled back, “You’re in a hot-air balloon, about 150 feet above the
headquarters of this investment bank.”
   The balloonist replied, “You must be a forecaster at the investment bank,
then.”
   Obviously surprised, the man said, “Yes, I am! How did you know that?”
   “Well,” said the balloonist, “what you told me is technically correct, but it is
of no use to anyone.”
   The best way to determine the value of a business is based on the price a
private investor would pay for the entire business. For example, Seth Klarman
determines the price he would pay for the asset in question and calls that the
private market value.
   GAMCO Investors defined private market value as follows:

     Private Market Value (PMV) is the value an informed industrialist would
     pay to purchase assets with similar characteristics. We measure PMV by
     scrutinizing on-and off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities and free cash
     flow. As a reference check, we examine valuations and transactions in the
     public domain. Our investment objective is to achieve an annual return of
     10% above inflation for our clients.7

  While there are many different ways of making this calculation, as will be
explained below, all Graham value investors avoid trying to value shares of stock
based on popular opinion. An illustration of this point can be found by
examining why Munger does not buy gold. Munger does not own gold as an
investment because it is impossible to do a bottom-up fundamental valuation,
because gold is not an income-producing asset. Gold has speculative value and
commercial value, but in Munger’s view it has no calculable intrinsic value.
Buffett has said that he would be happy to accept a gift of gold, but he would not
buy it as an investment. Determining speculative value is all about making
predictions about mass psychology, and that is a game Munger does not want to

[PDF PAGE 29]
play. As will be discussed, a private market intrinsic valuation for a Graham
value investor requires that the asset generate free cash flow.


Second Principle: Buy at a Significant Discount to Intrinsic Value to Create
                            a Margin of Safety

     The idea of a margin of safety, a Graham precept, will never be obsolete.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


     No matter how wonderful [a business] is, it’s not worth an infinite price. We
     have to have a price that makes sense and gives a margin of safety
     considering the normal vicissitudes of life.
                        —CHARLIE MUNGER, BBC INTERVIEW, 2009


  Munger is making the point that if there is a single principle that should rise
above all others in the mind of a Graham value investor, it is margin of safety.
No one makes this point better than Ben Graham himself:

     Confronted with a challenge to distill the secret of sound investment into
     three words, we venture the following motto, MARGIN OF SAFETY.
                     —BEN GRAHAM, THE INTELLIGENT INVESTOR, 1949


   What is a margin of safety? Ben Graham’s definition of a margin of safety is
“a favorable difference between price on the one hand and indicated or
appraised [intrinsic] value on the other.”8 Intrinsic value is the present value of
future cash flows. Margin of safety reflects the difference between the intrinsic
value and the current market price. The purpose of a margin of safety is quite
simple according to Graham: “The function of the margin of safety is, in
essence, that of rendering unnecessary an accurate estimate of the future.”9 Seth
Klarman described the Graham value investing system simply: buy at a bargain
defined by a margin of safety and wait. However, as the Tom Petty and the
Heartbreakers lyric says, “The waiting is the hardest part.”
   A margin of safety for investors in public markets is analogous to a safe
following distance when driving on the freeway. The intent of both approaches is
to avoid having to make predictions. With sufficient distance between you and
the car ahead, you must react to what you see in the present moment, but you do
not need to predict the actions of the driver ahead of you. If you drive only a few
feet behind the speeding car ahead, you need prediction instead of just reaction;

[PDF PAGE 30]
otherwise, you are going to crash. Simply put, your objective as a Graham value
investor is to buy a share of stock at a sufficiently large bargain that you do not
need to predict short-term price movements in the stock market.
   The margin of safety principle is natural for a person like Munger, who is
trying to succeed by avoiding what is hard (e.g., predicting the future in the short
term). He has learned to take the ordinary person’s desire to solve hard problems
and turn it on its head. Seth Klarman wrote:

     A margin of safety is achieved when securities are purchased at prices
     sufficiently below underlying value to allow for human error, bad luck, or
     extreme volatility in a complex, unpredictable and rapidly changing world.
                        —SETH KLARMAN, MARGIN OF SAFETY, 1991


   The last point made by Klarman is essential. Making successful predictions
about complex systems is a process in which errors are inevitable. Having a
margin of safety means that even if you make mistakes, you can still win. And if
you do not make mistakes, your win will be even bigger. Munger has a clear
view:

     In engineering, people have a big margin of safety. But in the financial
     world, people don’t give a damn about safety. They let it balloon and
     balloon and balloon.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


     If you could take the stock price and multiply it by the number of shares
     and get something that was one third or less of sellout value, [Ben Graham]
     would say that you’ve got a lot of edge going for you. Even with an elderly
     alcoholic running a stodgy business, this significant excess of real value per
     share working for you means that all kinds of good things can happen to
     you. You had a huge margin of safety—as he put it—by having this big
     excess value going for you.
        —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA (USC) BUSINESS
                                  SCHOOL, 1994


   Munger believes that the margin of safety process in investing is similar to
processes that exist in engineering. For example, if you are building a bridge, as
the engineer you want to make sure that it is significantly stronger than
necessary to deal with the very worst case. Buffett wrote once: “When you build
a bridge, you insist it can carry 30,000 pounds, but you only drive 10,000 pound

[PDF PAGE 31]
trucks across it. And the same idea works in investing.”10 Munger believes
investing should be similar. The first rule of investing is: do not make big
financial mistakes. The second rule is the same as the first rule.
   Behind the margin of safety principle is the simple idea that having a cushion
in terms of excess value can protect you against making an error. If you buy at a
discount, you have a margin of safety, which will help protect you from making
mistakes. This will improve your odds of success. Everyone makes mistakes, so
having insurance against those mistakes is wise. Finding an investment
opportunity with the right margin of safety is uncommon, so you must be patient.
The temptation to do something while you wait is too hard for most people to
resist.
   As Munger has found over the years, by making certain variables that do not
change the four fundamental principles of the Graham value investing system
and instead building on top of them, the system has been able to evolve as
investing conditions have changed.

     Ben Graham followers … started defining a bargain in a different way. And
     they kept changing the definition so that they could keep doing what they’d
     always done. And it still worked pretty well.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   Munger’s use of the word bargain in the quote immediately above is
important. It is not enough for a stock to be beaten down in price or off its highs.
What is cheap to buy relative to the past may in fact not be a bargain in the
present. To deliver a margin of safety to the Graham value investor, the stock
must be worth significantly more than what he or she paid. How significant the
bargain must be will be discussed later. The Graham value investor should
always remember this admonition: price is what you pay, and value is what you
get. It is common for Graham value investors to say things like, “My goal in
buying a financial asset is to buy a dollar for 70 cents.” When they say this, they
do not mean “buy a dollar for seventy cents” precisely, but they do seek a
significant discount from intrinsic value. Put simply: when a Graham value
investor can buy a dollar for a few dimes less than actual value, he or she can
make significant mistakes and still make a profit.

     Ben Graham had a lot to learn as an investor. His ideas of how to value
     companies were all shaped by how the Great Crash and the Depression
     almost destroyed him, and he was always a little afraid of what the market
     can do. It left him with an aftermath of fear for the rest of his life, and all

[PDF PAGE 32]
     his methods were designed to keep that at bay. I think Ben Graham wasn’t
     nearly as good an investor as Warren Buffett is or even as good as I am.
     Buying those cheap, cigar-butt stocks [companies with limited potential
     growth selling at a fraction of what they would be worth in a takeover or
     liquidation] was a snare and a delusion, and it would never work with the
     kinds of sums of money we have. You can’t do it with billions of dollars or
     even many millions of dollars. But he was a very good writer and a very
     good teacher and a brilliant man, one of the only intellectuals—probably
     the only intellectual—in the investing business at the time.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, JASON ZWEIG INTERVIEW, 2014


   What Munger is saying above is that what Ben Graham did in applying the
concept of a margin of safety in his era was quite different from how investors
(like Munger and Buffett) use it today. Look at history. In the aftermath of the
Great Depression, Graham was spending most of his time searching for
companies “worth more dead than alive.”11 The stock market crash and the Great
Depression caused many people to simply give up on owning stocks. For a long
time after the Great Depression, some companies could be purchased at less than
liquidation value. While these so-called cigar-butt companies were common
during this period of time, as years passed they became harder to find in major
markets. Graham himself said this late in his life, which confuses many people
to this day: the fact that public companies were no longer trading at less than
liquidation value did not mean that it was no longer possible to use the Graham
value investing system successfully.
   As a result of the new post-Great Depression environment, Munger and many
other Graham value investors began to apply the same Graham value investing
principles to businesses that were of high quality instead of businesses trading
below liquidation value—and the margin of safety process worked just as well.
The variables that supplement the Graham value investing system began to
evolve for some investors. Considering the quality of a business when valuing a
business will be discussed later in the book.
   Walter Schloss, Howard Marks, Seth Klarman, and a few other Graham value
investors have stayed closer to Graham’s cigar-butt style and instead focused on
less-traded markets, given that there are only a small number of cigar-butt
opportunities in major public markets. Howard Marks pointed out that “active
management has to be seen as the search for mistakes.”12 In his view, it is in less-
traded markets and so-called distressed assets where mistakes are most likely to
be found.

[PDF PAGE 33]
   Third Principle: Make “Mr. Market” Your Servant Rather Than Your
                                Master

     Ben Graham [had] his concept of “Mr. Market.” Instead of thinking the
     market was efficient, he treated it as a manic-depressive who comes by
     every day. And some days he says, “I’ll sell you some of my interest for
     way less than you think it is worth.” And other days, “Mr. Market” comes
     by and says, “I’ll buy your interest at a price that’s way higher than you
     think its worth.”
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


In the above statement, Munger is illustrating that Ben Graham’s Mr. Market
metaphor is as powerful as it is simple. The Graham value investor believes Mr.
Market is unpredictably bipolar in the short term; for that reason, when the
market is depressed, it will sometimes sell you an asset at a bargain price. Other
times, because it is euphoric, the market will pay you more than the asset is
worth. Knowing the difference between these two emotional states is of critical
importance to the successful use of the Graham value investing system. Mr.
Market’s emotional problems arise because he is composed of many people who,
in the short term, vote to establish a price for an asset based on their emotions
and predictions about the predictions and actions of all the other people who
make up the market. Ben Graham pointed out that markets are largely composed
of such people as “[person] A [who is] trying to decide what B, C, and D are
likely to think—with B, C, and D trying to do the same.”13
   For the Graham value investor, it is precisely when Mr. Market is depressed
that the greatest opportunities to purchase assets exist. Stocks at that time are
likely to be mispriced to an extent that generates a significant bargain. As Ben
Graham questioned, why turn something like a drop in stock prices—which is
fundamentally advantageous—into something disadvantageous? As long as the
fundamentals of the business itself remain in place, a market’s short-term views
on the price of the shares can be ignored and will be corrected in the long term.
This approach reinforces the importance of a fundamental analysis of the
business itself. There are essentially three steps in the process: analyze the
business to determine intrinsic value, buy the assets at a significant bargain, and
wait.
   Any discussion about markets inevitably causes arguments related to the so-
called efficient market hypothesis (EMH). Proponents of the hard version of the
EMH believe that investors cannot beat the market because it is always perfectly
priced. Unlike EMH proponents, Munger believes that markets are mostly

[PDF PAGE 34]
efficient but not always efficient:

     I think it’s roughly right that the market is efficient, which makes it very
     hard to beat merely by being an intelligent investor. But I don’t think it’s
     totally efficient at all. And the difference between being totally efficient and
     somewhat efficient leaves an enormous opportunity for people like us to get
     these unusual records. It’s efficient enough, so it’s hard to have a great
     investment record. But it’s by no means impossible. Nor is it something that
     only a very few people can do. The top 3 or 4 percent of the investment
     management world will do fine.
                           —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER, 2009


   One might say that Munger believes in a mostly efficient hypothesis. He
believes that the difference between mostly and always efficient is a huge
opportunity for a Graham value investor. Stocks are sometimes underpriced and
sometimes overpriced. Anyone who invested through the Internet bubble (as I
did) and who still thinks that markets are always efficient (a so-called extreme
view of market efficiency) is bonkers.
   A fundamental premise of the Graham value investing system is that prices
will always move up and down in cycles. Graham value investors do not believe
these business cycles are predictable in a way that can generate an above-market
financial return in the short term. As the business cycle moves prices
unpredictably back and forth over time, the reference point is always intrinsic
value. Intrinsic value is, in that way, like a mark on a barometer that sets an
important reference point. The investor’s job is to patiently watch rather than
predict price movements and be ready to quickly and aggressively buy at a
significant discount to intrinsic value and sometimes sell at an attractive price in
relation to intrinsic value. For a Graham value investor, reacting quickly and
aggressively to favorable prices when they unpredictably appear is essential.
Munger pointed out:

     To Graham, it was a blessing to be in business with a manic-depressive who
     gave you this series of options all the time.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


  Mr. Market’s bipolar nature is his gift to Graham value investors.
Occasionally he will present them with great bargains. At other times he’ll buy
your assets at a premium. Munger’s point on this is simple: do not treat Mr.
Market as wise; instead, view him as your servant. It is certain that the prices of

[PDF PAGE 35]
investment assets will wiggle above and below intrinsic value. Do not try to
predict when the wiggle will happen, but rather patiently wait for when it
happens. Graham value investors price stocks rather than time markets. Patience
is a difficult part of the Graham value investing system. If you expect the market
to give you enough profit to buy a car or a speedboat next week, you will
inevitably fail to achieve your financial goals.

     It’s an unfortunate fact that great and foolish excess can come into prices of
     common stocks in the aggregate. They are valued partly like bonds, based
     on roughly rational projections of use value in producing future cash. But
     they are also valued partly like Rembrandt paintings, purchased mostly
     because their prices have gone up, so far.
                         —CHARLIE MUNGER, PHILANTHROPY, 2009


    Falling in with the crowd will put you under the sway of Mr. Market because
Mr. Market is the crowd. If you are the crowd, then you cannot, by definition,
beat the crowd. Munger believes that short-term price movements are not
rationally based, based on always-efficient markets, or predictable with certainty.
The best advice is simple; Buffet says, “Be fearful when others are greedy, and
be greedy when others are fearful.”14 This is easy to say but hard to do, because
it requires courage at the hardest possible time.

     Over many decades, our usual practice is that if [the stock of] something we
     like goes down, we buy more and more. Sometimes something happens,
     you realize you’re wrong, and you get out. But if you develop correct
     confidence in your judgment, buy more and take advantage of stock prices.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


   Graham’s value investing system is based on the premise that risk (the
possibility of losing) is determined by the price at which you buy an asset. The
higher the price you pay for an asset, the greater the risk that you will experience
a loss of capital. If the price of a stock drops, risk goes down, not up. For this
reason, the Graham value investor will often find that price decrease for a given
stock is an opportunity to buy more of that stock. Buffett put it this way: “I’m
going to buy hamburgers the rest of my life. When hamburgers go down in price,
we sing the Hallelujah chorus in the Buffett household. When hamburgers go
up, we weep.”15
   The paradox facing the ordinary investor is that usually only the biggest
investors (huge pension funds, university endowments, and the very wealthy) get

[PDF PAGE 36]
access to what Munger refers to as the top 3 to 4 percent investment
management. This problem for the ordinary investor is reflected in a variant of
an old Groucho Marx joke: you do not want to hire an investment manager that
would take you for a client! People managing funds based on Graham value
investing principles know that experienced and successful investors are much
less likely to panic when a market declines and instead view market declines as
an opportunity. Graham value investor Marty Whitman has even said that he
does not want people in his fund who do not understand Graham value investing
system because he must sell shares when they redeem their ownership interest.


        Fourth Principle: Be Rational, Objective, and Dispassionate

     Rationality is not just something you do so that you can make more money;
     it’s a binding principle. Rationality is a really good idea. You must avoid
     the nonsense that is conventional in one’s own time. It requires developing
     systems of thought that improve your batting average over time.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2006


     [An] increase in rationality is not just something you choose or don’t
     choose; it’s a moral duty to keep up as much as you reasonably can. It
     worked so well at Berkshire, not because we were so darned smart to start
     with—we were massively ignorant. Any of the great successes of Berkshire
     started with stupidity and failure.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2011


     The idea of being objective and dispassionate will never be obsolete.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


As the above quotes indicate, over the years Munger has repeatedly said that the
most important quality that makes anyone a successful investor is the ability to
make rational thoughts and decisions. It is difficult to overestimate how
important being rational is to the Graham value investing system. Rationality is
the best antidote to making psychological and emotional errors. During an
interview, Munger once recalled that a person sitting next to him at a dinner
party asked him, “Tell me, what one quality accounts for your enormous
success?” Munger replied, “I’m rational. That’s the answer. I’m rational.” This
rationality is something he works hard to cultivate, as will be explained shortly.
Being rational is neither simple nor easy.
   While Graham value investors do not try to predict the behavior of other

[PDF PAGE 37]
people, they do spend a lot of time trying to keep their own behavior from
getting in the way of being rational, objective, and dispassionate. The best
Graham value investors understand that if you think things through from the
simplest building blocks in a step-by-step process and employ techniques like
checklists, which reinforce the Graham value investing system, you can avoid
making most mistakes—or at least making new mistakes. Most of this book will
be devoted to this fourth principle of the Graham value investing system.

[PDF PAGE 38]
                                       3
                        WORLDLY WISDOM
    What is elementary, worldly wisdom? Well, the first rule is that you can’t
    really know anything if you just remember isolated facts and try and bang
    ’em back. If the facts don’t hang together on a latticework of theory, you
    don’t have them in a usable form.
       —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA (USC) BUSINESS
                                 SCHOOL, 1994


    You must know the big ideas in the big disciplines, and use them routinely
    —all of them, not just a few. Most people are trained in one model—
    economics, for example—and try to solve all problems in one way. You
    know the old saying: to the man with a hammer, the world looks like a nail.
    This is a dumb way of handling problems.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2000


    All the wisdom of the world is not to be found in one little academic
    department. That’s why poetry professors, by and large, are so unwise in a
    worldly sense. They don’t have enough models in their heads.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


    What are the models? Well, the first rule is that you’ve got to have multiple
    models—because if you just have one or two that you’re using, the nature
    of human psychology is such that you’ll torture reality so that it fits your
    models.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


Munger has adopted an approach to business and life that he refers to as worldly
wisdom. Munger believes that by using a range of different models from many
different disciplines—psychology, history, mathematics, physics, philosophy,
biology, and so on—a person can use the combined output of the synthesis to
produce something that has more value than the sum of its parts. Robert
Hagstrom wrote a wonderful book on worldly wisdom entitled Investing: The
Last Liberal Art, in which he states that “each discipline entwines with, and in
the process strengthens, every other. From each discipline the thoughtful person

[PDF PAGE 39]
draws significant mental models, the key ideas that combine to produce a
cohesive understanding. Those who cultivate this broad view are well on their
way to achieving worldly wisdom.”1
   It is clear that Munger loves to learn. He actually has fun when he is learning,
and that makes the worldly wisdom investing process enjoyable for him. This is
important because many people do not find investing enjoyable, especially when
compared to gambling, which science has shown can generate pleasure via
chemicals (e.g., dopamine) even though it is an activity with a negative net
present value. What Munger has done is created a system—worldly wisdom—
that allows him to generate the same chemical rewards in an activity that has a
positive net present value. When you learn something new, your brain gives
itself a chemical reward, which motivates you to do the work necessary to be a
successful investor. If you do this work and adopt a worldly wisdom mindset,
Munger believes you will create an investing edge over other investors.
   In developing his worldly wisdom approach, Munger uses what he calls a
“lattice of mental models.” What is a mental model? Herbert Simon captured the
idea:

     A large part of the difference between the experienced decision maker and
     the novice in these situations is not any particular intangible like
     “judgment” or “intuition.” If one could open the lid, so to speak, and see
     what was in the head of the experienced decision maker, one would find
     that he had at his disposal repertoires of possible actions; that he had
     checklists of things to think about before he acted; and that he had
     mechanisms in his mind to evoke these, and bring these to his conscious
     attention when the situations for decisions arose.
                      —HERBERT SIMON, MCKINSEY QUARTERLY, 1986


   The lattice metaphor was also carefully chosen by Munger to convey the idea
that the multiple models needed to acquire worldly wisdom must be
interconnected.

     You’ve got to have models in your head. And you’ve got to array your
     experience—both vicarious and direct—on this latticework of models.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


  Understanding the worldly wisdom methodology is made easier if you see it
applied in an example. To illustrate the method, Munger gave the example of a
business that raises the price of its product and yet sells more of that product.

[PDF PAGE 40]
This would appear to violate the rule of supply and demand as taught in
economics. However, if one thinks about the discipline of psychology, one might
conclude that the product is a Geffen good, which people desire more of at
higher prices. Or one could conclude that low prices signal poor quality to
buyers and that raising prices will result in more sales. Alternatively, you can
look for bias caused by incentives and discover that what has actually happened
in his example is that the seller has bribed the purchasing agents of the
purchasers.
  Munger described a situation in which this actually happens:

    Suppose you’re the manager of a mutual fund, and you want to sell more.
    People commonly come to the following answer: You raise the
    commissions which, of course, reduces the number of units of real
    investments delivered to the ultimate buyer, so you’re increasing the price
    per unit of real investment that you’re selling the ultimate customer. And
    you’re using that extra commission to bribe the customer’s purchasing
    agent. You’re bribing the broker to betray his client and put the client’s
    money into the high-commission product.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, UCS BUSINESS SCHOOL, 2003


   No one can know everything, but you can work to understand the big,
important models in each discipline at a basic level so they can collectively add
value in a decision-making process. Simply put, Munger believes that people
who think very broadly and understand many different models from many
different disciplines make better decisions and are therefore better investors.
This view should not be a surprise because he believes that the world is
composed of many complex systems that are constantly interacting:

    You’ve got a complex system and it spews out a lot of wonderful numbers
    that enable you to measure some factors. But there are other factors that are
    terribly important, [yet] there’s no precise numbering you can put to these
    factors. You know they’re important, but you don’t have the numbers. Well,
    practically (1) everybody overweighs the stuff that can be numbered,
    because it yields to the statistical techniques they’re taught in academia, and
    (2) doesn’t mix in the hard-to-measure stuff that may be more important.
    That is a mistake I’ve tried all my life to avoid, and I have no regrets for
    having done that.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, UCS BUSINESS SCHOOL, 2003

[PDF PAGE 41]
   In Munger’s view, it is better to be worldly wise than to spend lots of time
working with a single model that is precisely wrong.
   A multiple-model approach that is only approximately right will produce a far
better outcome in anything that involves people or a social system. While
making the case for a lattice of mental models approach (described here shortly),
Robert Hagstrom pointed out that Munger is providing support for those who
advocate for a wide-ranging liberal arts education. Munger argued persuasively
that activities like reading great books can help someone become a better
investor:

     The theory of modern education is that you need a general education before
     you specialize. And I think to some extent, before you’re going to be a great
     stock picker, you need some general education.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


    In the language of Wharton Professor Philip Tetlock, Munger is a “fox” (who
knows a little about a lot) rather than a “hedgehog” (who knows a lot about very
little).2 Among the foxes one may encounter in life, Munger is truly special. He
knows a lot about a lot, and he knows a little about nearly everything. Bill Gates
made this point when he said, “Charlie Munger is truly the broadest thinker I
have ever encountered.”3 Buffett added that Munger has “the best 30-second
mind in the world. He goes from A to Z in one move. He sees the essence of
everything before you even finish the sentence.”4
    Munger believes that thinking broadly in many disciplines makes you a better
thinker because everything is literally related.

     You have to realize the truth of biologist Julian Huxley’s idea that “Life is
     just one damn relatedness after another.” So you must have the models, and
     you must see the relatedness and the effects from the relatedness.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK, 2005


   Understanding disciplines like biology, psychology, chemistry, physics,
history, philosophy, or engineering will make you a better investor. Munger
believes:

     People calculate too much and think too little.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


  Munger’s breadth of knowledge is something that is naturally part of his

[PDF PAGE 42]
character but also something that he intentionally cultivates. In his view, to know
nothing about an important subject is to invite problems. Both Munger and
Buffett set aside plenty of time each day to just think. Anyone reading the news
is provided with constant reminders of the consequences of not thinking.
Thinking is a surprisingly underrated activity. Researchers published a study in
2014 that revealed that approximately a quarter of women and two-thirds of men
chose electric shocks over spending time alone with their own thoughts.5
Munger would likely say that people who cannot be alone with their own
thoughts are terrible candidates to become successful investors.
    Munger’s speeches and essays are filled with the thoughts of great people
from the past and present from many different domains. Munger is also careful
to set aside a lot of time in his schedule for reading. To say he loves books is an
understatement. Buffett has said that Munger has read hundreds of biographies,
as just one example. He is very purposeful in his approach to worldly wisdom,
preferring not to fill his calendar with appointments and meetings. “You could
hardly find a partnership in which two people settle on reading more hours of the
day than in ours.” Buffett added, “Look, my job is essentially just corralling
more and more and more facts and information, and occasionally seeing whether
that leads to some action.”6
    Munger illustrates the idea of worldly wisdom by pointing out that many
professionals often think only about their own discipline, believing that whatever
it is that they do for a living will cure all problems. A nutritionist may feel as if
he or she can cure anything, for example. A chiropractor may believe he or she
can cure cancer. Learning from others is essential, according to Munger.

     I believe in the discipline of mastering the best that other people have ever
     figured out. I don’t believe in just sitting down and trying to dream it all up
     yourself. Nobody’s that smart.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, STANFORD LAW SCHOOL, 1998


   It is critical for a person who desires to be wise to think broadly and learn
from others. Munger has said many times that someone who is really smart but
has devoted all of their time to being an expert in a narrow area may be
dangerous to themselves and others. Examples of this include macroeconomists
who study the economy but are disastrous when investing their own portfolios
and marketing experts who may think that most all business problems can be
solved through marketing. Financiers tend to think similarly about their own
profession. Too many people believe that what they do at work is hard and what
others do is easy.

[PDF PAGE 43]
   Munger believes that the best approach to dealing with problems can be found
in adopting a multidisciplinary approach:

    You may say, “My God, this is already getting way too tough.” But,
    fortunately, it isn’t that tough—because eighty or ninety important models
    will carry about 90 percent of the freight in making you a worldly wise
    person. And, of those, only a mere handful really carry very heavy freight.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   This reference to “eighty or ninety important models” has caused people to
ask Munger for a complete list of these important models. While Munger
identified many models in the discipline of psychology in his famous “The
Psychology of Human Misjudgment” speech and mentioned other models on an
ad-hoc basis, he has never prepared a complete list covering all disciplines.
   Munger believes that by learning to recognize certain dysfunctional decision-
making processes, an investor can learn to make fewer mistakes. He also
believes that no matter how hard someone works and learns, mistakes cannot be
completely eliminated. The best one can hope for is to reduce their frequency
and, hopefully, their magnitude. Munger elaborated:

    Man’s imperfect, limited-capacity brain easily drifts into working with
    what’s easily available to it. And the brain can’t use what it can’t remember
    or when it’s blocked from recognizing because it’s heavily influenced by
    one or more psychological tendencies bearing strongly on it … the deep
    structure of the human mind requires that the way to full scope competency
    of virtually any kind is to learn it all to fluency—like it or not.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


    I constantly see people rise in life who are not the smartest, sometimes not
    even the most diligent, but they are learning machines. They go to bed
    every night a little wiser than they were when they got up, and boy, does
    that help, particularly when you have a long run ahead of you. … So if
    civilization can progress only with an advanced method of invention, you
    can progress only when you learn the method of learning. Nothing has
    served me better in my long life than continuous learning. I went through
    life constantly practicing (because if you don’t practice it, you lose it) the
    multidisciplinary approach and I can’t tell you what that’s done for me. It’s
    made life more fun, it’s made me more constructive, it’s made me more
    helpful to others, and it’s made me enormously rich. You name it, that

[PDF PAGE 44]
     attitude really helps.
                        —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC LAW SCHOOL, 2007


   In looking at a decision, Munger believes that it is wise to ask questions. Have
dysfunctional decision-making heuristics from psychology caused an error? Are
there approaches one can use to find those mistakes? Munger likes to use a
model from algebra and invert problems to find a solution. Looking for models
that can reveal and explain mistakes so one can accumulate worldly wisdom is
actually lots of fun. It is like a puzzle to be solved.
   A lattice approach is, in effect, a double-check on the investing process. But
instead of just two checks, you are checking the result over and over. Munger
believes that by going over your decision-making process and carefully using
skills, ideas, and models from many disciplines, you can more consistently not
be stupid. You will always make some bone-headed mistakes even if you’re
careful, but his process is designed to decrease the probability of those mistakes.
   To make sure he is taking advantage of as many models as possible, Munger
likes checklists:

     You need a different checklist and different mental models for different
     companies. I can never make it easy by saying, “Here are three things.” You
     have to derive it yourself to ingrain it in your head for the rest of your life.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


   As part of his worldly wisdom approach to life, Munger focuses on learning
from mistakes:

     You can learn to make fewer mistakes than other people—and how to fix
     your mistakes faster when you do make them.
                      —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


     Terribly smart people make totally bonkers mistakes.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


     I don’t want you to think we have any way of learning or behaving so you
     won’t make mistakes.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


  Munger learned about business in the best way possible: by participating in it
on a firsthand basis, and by sometimes making mistakes and sometimes being
successful. Through the process of making mistakes and succeeding or failing in

[PDF PAGE 45]
the real world (i.e., getting feedback from the market), you can learn and
establish sound business judgment. Many Berkshire investments have been
valuable in that they have taught Buffett and Munger what not to do. For Buffett,
buying a New England textile mill in the 1960s was in some ways a mistake. It
was a lousy business that was not worth putting any new capital into, because it
would never generate more return on capital investment than alternative
investments available to Buffett. When Berkshire paid too much for Conoco
Phillips or bought US Airways, it was a mistake. Buying Dexter Shoes was also
a multi-billion dollar mistake for Berkshire. In doing their due-diligence analysis
for Dexter shoes, Buffett and Munger made the mistakes of not making sure the
business had a moat and being too focused on what they thought was an
attractive purchase price. Buffett said once about Dexter Shoes: “What I had
assessed as durable competitive advantage vanished within a few years.”7
Capitalism inherently means that others will always be trying to replicate any
business that is profitable. You are always in a battle to keep what you have.
Dexter Shoes lost that battle quickly. If you make a mistake, capitalism’s
“competitive destruction” forces will expose it swiftly and, sometimes, brutally.

     I don’t think it’s necessary to be as dumb as we were.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2011


     I like people admitting they were complete stupid horses’ asses. I know I’ll
     perform better if I rub my nose in my mistakes. This is a wonderful trick to
     learn.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2011


   Munger has said repeatedly that he made more mistakes earlier in life than he
is making now. One of his early mistakes was to own a company that made
electrical transformers. He has also said that he has found himself in real estate
ventures that would only be enjoyed by a masochist. He seems to have more
tolerance for mistakes in real estate than other areas of business. The idea of
building things as opposed to just trading stocks has a particular appeal to
Munger.
   Munger believes that one great way to avoid mistakes is to own a business
that is simple to understand, given your education and experience. He pointed
out: “Where you have complexity, by nature you can have fraud and mistakes.”8
This approach echoes the view of Buffett, who likes challenges that are the
business equivalent of netting fish in a barrel.
   Buffett has said that if you cannot explain why you failed after you have made

[PDF PAGE 46]
a mistake, the business was too complex for you. In other words, Munger and
Buffett like to understand why they made a mistake so they can learn from the
experience. If you cannot understand the business, then you cannot determine
what you did wrong. If you cannot determine what you did wrong, then you
cannot learn. If you cannot learn, you will not know what you’re doing, which is
the real cause of risk.

    Forgetting your mistakes is a terrible error if you’re trying to improve your
    cognition. Reality doesn’t remind you. Why not celebrate stupidities in both
    categories?
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2006


   Munger admits that he still makes mistakes even after many decades as a
business person and investor. Among the worst mistakes Munger has made are
things that he didn’t do.

    The most extreme mistakes in Berkshire’s history have been mistakes of
    omission. We saw it, but didn’t act on it. They’re huge mistakes—we’ve
    lost billions. And we keep doing it. We’re getting better at it. We never get
    over it. There are two types of mistakes: 1) doing nothing—what Warren
    calls “sucking my thumb” and 2) buying with an eyedropper things we
    should be buying a lot of.
                —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2001


    Our biggest mistakes were things we didn’t do, companies we didn’t buy.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, FORTUNE MAGAZINE, 1998


  Munger and Buffett’s decision to not invest in Wal-Mart is just one example
of a mistake of omission. Buffett has said that just this one mistake with Wal-
Mart cost them $10 billion. Similarly, in 1973, Tom Murphy offered to sell a
group of television stations to Berkshire for $35 million and Berkshire Hathaway
declined. “That [failure to buy those television stations] was a huge mistake of
omission,”9 Buffett has admitted.
  Munger has chosen the word wisdom purposefully because he believes that
mere knowledge, especially from only one domain, is not enough. To be wise,
one must also have experience, common sense, and good judgment. How one
actually applies these things in life is what makes a person wise.

[PDF PAGE 47]
                                         4
  THE PSYCHOLOGY OF HUMAN MISJUDGMENT


HUMANS HAVE DEVELOPED simple rules of thumb called heuristics, which enable
them to efficiently make decisions. Heuristics are essential; without them it
would be impossible to make the decisions required to get through a normal day.
They allow people to cope with information and computation overload and to
deal with risk, uncertainty, and ignorance. Unfortunately, these heuristics can
sometimes result in tendencies to do certain things that are dysfunctional. Of
course, having a tendency is not destiny. That people will tend to do something
does not mean that they will always do so, that they cannot learn to overcome
the tendency, or that all people have the same tendency. Everyone, including
Munger, must be careful not to fall prey to certain (often dysfunctional)
tendencies.
   Particularly in the context of human activities that were not a part of most of
our evolutionary past as a species (such as investing), heuristics can produce one
boneheaded mistake after another. Professor Richard Zeckhauser, whom Munger
admires greatly for his decision-making processes when playing bridge and as an
investor, wrote: “individuals tend to extrapolate heuristics from situations where
they make sense to those where they do not.”1

     Bias [arises] from the nonmathematical nature of the human brain in its
     natural state as it deals with probabilities employing crude heuristics, and is
     often misled.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


  Why does this happen? James Montier pointed out:

     The simple truth is that we aren’t adapted to face the world as it is today.
     We evolved in a very different environment, and it’s that ancestral
     evolutionary environment that governs the way in which we think and feel.
     We can learn to push our minds into alternative ways of thinking, but it isn’t
     easy, as we have to overcome the limits to learning posed by self-deception.
     In addition, we need to practice the reframing of data into more

[PDF PAGE 48]
     evolutionary, familiar forms if we are to process it correctly.
                         —JAMES MONTIER, DARWIN’S MIND, 2006


   Heuristics conserve scarce mental and physical resources, but the same
process, which is sometimes beneficial, can lead people to harmful systematic
errors.

     Tendencies are probably much more good than bad. Otherwise, they
     wouldn’t be there, working pretty well for man, given his condition and his
     limited brain capacity. So the tendencies can’t be simply washed out
     automatically and shouldn’t be. … Tendency is not always destiny, and
     knowing the tendencies and their antidotes can often help prevent trouble
     that would otherwise occur.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


   One way to understand Munger better is to relate his thinking to a personal
story. My case involved something that happened a few years ago. For a few
months, I had been having slight pain in my bicep muscles near my elbows. My
doctor said the injury probably resulted from lifting weights. One night in
January of 2013, I was sleeping soundly when I was jolted awake by much more
significant pain in both of my arms. I immediately thought, “I am having a small
heart attack. I need to get to an emergency room.” I woke my wife and asked her
to get dressed quickly and get in the car. As we were driving to the hospital, the
painful sensations in my arms started to go away. It was at that point that I
started convincing myself that pain in my arms was not really from a heart
attack. I am sure I was subconsciously thinking, “I have a busy schedule next
week. I can’t have a heart attack right now. This pain is most likely nothing. I
probably just hurt myself in the gym. Who has a heart attack without any chest
pain?” At that point I said to my wife, “Maybe we should go home. Are you
going to insist that we go to the hospital?” My wife did insist and we went to the
emergency room. I might have argued with her, but at that moment I reminded
myself about Munger and Buffett’s approach to risk:

     Take the probability of loss times the amount of possible loss from the
     probability of gain times the amount of possible gain. That is what we’re
     trying to do. It’s imperfect, but that’s what it’s all about.
                 —WARREN BUFFETT, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 1989


  Going to the emergency room for tests on my heart function was clearly wise

[PDF PAGE 49]
because the amount of possible loss was so massive even if the probability was
small (which it was not, given the symptoms). After thinking about this formula,
I knew I needed to get to the hospital. In this case, rationality (and my wife)
overcame psychological denial, optimism, and other negative decision-making
tendencies. It turned out that my pain was from a small heart attack, and three
days later, I was in the operating room for a triple-bypass operation on my heart.
   The reality is that we all tell ourselves false stories to avoid the truth. Even if
you spend a lot of time studying behavioral economics, you can only improve
your skills on the margin. You will always make mistakes. Nobel Prize winner
Daniel Kahneman, who has spent most of his professional life researching
behavioral economics, has said: “Except for some effects that I attribute mostly
to age, my intuitive thinking is just as prone to overconfidence, extreme
predictions, and the planning fallacy.”2 Even though you cannot be perfect, you
can get marginally better at avoiding mistakes and have an edge in the market
over people who do not understand Munger’s tendencies and other aspects of
behavioral economics.
   Investing is less than a zero-sum game due to fees, costs, and expenses
relative to the market. If you are buying an investment, by definition someone
else is selling. Either the buyer or the seller is making a mistake, unless the price
of the asset does not change and the result is a draw. In other words, one truism
about investing is this: for you to find a significant mistake, someone else must
be making a mistake too.

     Investors operate within what is for the most part a zero-sum game. While
     it’s true that the value of all companies usually increases over time with
     economic growth, market outperformance by one investor is necessarily
     offset by another’s underperformance.
                     —SETH KLARMAN, BAUPOST GROUP LETTER, 2005


For example, if you understand dysfunctions that are caused by behavioral
economics phenomena and the other person does not, then you have a potential
edge. The best Graham value investors spend a lot of time thinking about
possible sources of dysfunctional decision-making and emotional errors. Other
people’s errors create opportunities for the Graham value investor. As Professor
Bruce Greenwald of Columbia Business School has noted, “There’s a lot of
behavioral finance confirming Ben Graham’s original judgment.”3
   Taking a close look at Munger’s explanation of some major psychological
tendencies is well worth your time. Munger is aware that his list of heuristics is
far from complete. Readers of this book are advised to read other books and

[PDF PAGE 50]
articles that expand on this list and deal with heuristics like mental accounting,
sunk cost, ambiguity, regret, and framing, just to name a few.

1. Reward and Punishment Superresponse Tendency
     Almost everyone thinks he fully recognizes how important incentives and
     disincentives are in changing cognition and behavior. But this is not often
     so. For instance, I think I’ve been in the top 5 percent of my age cohort
     almost all my adult life in understanding the power of incentives, and yet
     I’ve always underestimated that power. Never a year passes but I get some
     surprise that pushes a little further my appreciation of incentive superpower.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


     Upton Sinclair said it best of all. He said, “It’s very hard to get a man to
     believe non-X when his way of making a living requires him to believe X.”
     On a subconscious level, your brain plays tricks on you and you think [that]
     what is good for the true little me is what you should believe.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD-WESTLAKE SCHOOL, 2010


     The iron rule of nature is that you get what you reward for. If you want ants
     to come, put sugar on the floor.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2001


Reward and punishment superresponse tendency relates to what psychologists
call reinforcement and what economists call incentives. A classic example of this
tendency causing problems in investing may happen when a financial advisor is
able to earn a big sales commission for selling clients offerings, such as certain
types of annuities. The financial incentives available to the advisor can turn an
otherwise kindly, churchgoing, community-minded person into a perversely
motivated shark. This misalignment of incentives is why it is wise to retain a
fee-based financial planner and to make sure that he or she is not receiving
hidden rebates and sales commissions. Munger gave another example:

     Everyone wants to be an investment manager, raise the maximum amount
     of money, trade like mad with one another, and then just scrape the fees off
     the top. I know one guy; he’s extremely smart and a very capable investor. I
     asked him, “What returns do you tell your institutional clients you will earn
     for them?” He said, “20 percent.” I couldn’t believe it, because he knows
     that’s impossible. But he said, “Charlie, if I gave them a lower number, they

[PDF PAGE 51]
    wouldn’t give me any money to invest!” The investment-management
    business is insane.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, JASON ZWEIG INTERVIEW, 2014


   Munger’s story reminds me of another story:
   A man of the church died and was waiting in line at the pearly gates. Ahead of
him was a money manager. Saint Peter asked the money manager, “Who are
you? What did you do that might cause me to admit you to heaven?”
   “I’m Joe Smith. I managed the money of thousands of people,” the man
replied.
   Saint Peter consulted his list and said to the money manager, “Take this silk
robe and gold staff and enter heaven.”
   Now it was the minister’s turn. “I am Father Joseph Flannigan, most recently
of Saint Patrick’s in New York City.”
   Saint Peter consulted his list and said, “Take this cotton robe and wood staff
and enter heaven.”
   “Just a minute,” said Father Flannigan. “That man was a money manager—he
received a silk robe and gold staff, but I only get a cotton robe and wood staff?
How can this be?”
   “Up here, we make assignments based on results,” said Saint Peter. “While
you preached, people slept. His clients prayed.”
   What benefits an investor most in avoiding problems such as those Munger
discusses above is a financial planner who “eats his own cooking” with
incentives, which causes him to suffer and benefit right alongside his client.

    An example of a really responsible system is the system the Romans used
    when they built an arch. The guy who created the arch stood under it as the
    scaffolding was removed. It’s like packing your own parachute.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 1993


   It is easy to find examples of how improper incentives are damaging
civilization by reading the day’s news. An example of this problem and a
potential solution was raised by Nassim Taleb:

    Instead of relying on thousands of meandering pages of regulation, we
    should enforce a basic principle of “skin in the game” when it comes to
    financial oversight. “The captain goes down with the ship; every captain
    and every ship.” In other words, nobody should be in a position to have the
    upside without sharing the downside, particularly when others may be

[PDF PAGE 52]
     harmed.
                                 —NASSIM TALEB, 2012


   Munger sees this problem today reflected in the fact that accountants have
been turned into policemen by law and regulation due to the fact that managers
are not keeping themselves far away from activities that might be unethical or
illegal. Holding managers legally responsible for their actions would be a great
place to start.
   Munger believes that structuring compensation incentives is critical. If the
right structure exists, then a seamless web of deserved trust can be created which
lessens problems related to this tendency. For example, it is surprising how many
people fail to recognize how performance suffers if you pay someone in advance
rather than after the work has been completed. It’s precisely because of the
dangers of misaligned incentives that Munger and Buffett chose to make
compensation decisions themselves, whereas they delegate almost all
management responsibilities.


                          2. Liking/Loving Tendency

     Admiration also causes or intensifies liking or love. With this “feedback
     mode” in place, the consequences are often extreme, sometimes even
     causing deliberate self-destruction to help what is loved.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


Munger believes that people tend to ignore or deny the faults of people they love
and also tend to distort facts to facilitate that love. He believes we are more
influenced by people we like, and perhaps more importantly by people who
genuinely like us. There are obviously positive aspects to this tendency for
society, but they rarely have a place in making investment decisions. You may
like or even love your friend or relative, but that does not mean that you should
trust him or her with your money. Loaning money to relatives is fraught with
danger. It is usually a far better idea to simply give away money to needy friends
and relatives—or, if you do make a loan, to never expect it back. Relatives and
friends in receipt of your money as a loan too often acquire a short-term and
fuzzy/selective memory. Another example of this tendency arises when people
fall in love with a company and make investing mistakes about that company as
a result of that love. Even if you love your employer, it is very risky to have too
much of your savings in the stock of a single company. One way that some

[PDF PAGE 53]
companies leverage this tendency is to have their salespeople sell to people they
know at parties. Tupperware parties are a classic example of this principle in
action.
  One valuable check on this liking/loving tendency is to seek out wise people
who are not afraid to disagree with you. Munger likes to say that a year in which
you do not change your mind on some big idea that is important to you is a
wasted year.


                          3. Disliking/Hating Tendency

     Avoid evil, particularly if they’re attractive members of the opposite sex.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


The disliking/hating tendency is the inverse of the previous tendency. Munger
believes that life is too short to do business with people you don’t like. He also
refuses to invest in certain companies that sell goods and services that he does
not like for ethical reasons. As an example, Munger and Buffett avoid investing
in casinos.
   Munger believes that the disliking/hating tendency can sometimes be
dysfunctional even if you ignore the ethical aspects. For example, the fact that a
job candidate attended a rival college of your alma mater should not influence
your hiring decision. Taking a factor like that into account is simply not rational.
In other words, Munger believes it is sensible to pass judgment on a company or
person for ethical reasons, but one must be careful not to pass judgment on a
company or person based on irrational associations. Family members do not fall
outside of the disliking/hating tendency. Munger quoted Buffett on this point: “A
major difference between rich and poor people is that the rich people can spend
more of their time suing their relatives.”4
   Compliance professionals, including some politicians and religious leaders,
have learned to manipulate people into making decisions using this tendency. If
someone attempts to manipulate your behavior, you should stay rational and
separate how you feel about one thing from how you feel about something else
that is related. If someone seems to like or admire you, it may be a ruse to secure
your compliance with something they desire. The skill needed to sort out
whether a person is genuine is acquired with experience—the cause of good
judgment is usually experiences involving bad judgment. Some people seem to
never learn and some people seem to be born with good judgment, and this is
one of life’s great mysteries.

[PDF PAGE 54]
4. Doubt-Avoidance Tendency
     [It’s] counterproductive for a prey animal that is threatened by a predator to
     take a long time in deciding what to do.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK, 2005


Researchers believe that the doubt-avoidance tendency exists because a brain’s
processing load can be substantially reduced if a person rejects doubt. Daniel
Kahneman considers doubt-avoidance tendency to be a System 1 activity, which
Michael Mauboussin described as follows: “System 1 is your experiential
system. It’s fast. It’s quick. It’s automatic and really difficult to control. System 2
is your analytical system: slow, purposeful, deliberate, but malleable.”5 When it
comes to investments, avoiding doubt can get a person into serious trouble. One
example is the people who thought, “Why investigate an asset manager like
Bernard Madoff when avoiding doubt is so much easier? After all, he managed
money for many important people. Surely they looked carefully into his
operations and background.”
   The confidence of entrepreneurs bolstered by doubt-avoidance tendency
creates positive benefits for society in the aggregate by generating productivity
and genuine growth in the economy, even if legions of entrepreneurs may fail.
Nassim Taleb put it this way: “Most of you will fail, disrespected, impoverished,
but we are grateful for the risks you’re taking and the sacrifices you’re making
for the sake of the economic growth of the planet and pulling others out of
poverty. You’re the source of our antifragility. Our nation thanks you.”6

5. Inconsistency-Avoidance Tendency
     The brain of man conserves programming spaces by being reluctant to
     change.
                      —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


People are reluctant to change even when they have been given new information
that conflicts with what they already believe. Inconsistency-avoidance tendency
is another often-useful heuristic because starting each day with a fresh mind
about everything requires too much processing power. Unfortunately, as is the
case with every heuristic, what is mostly helpful can sometimes be harmful. The
adverse effects of this tendency can be made worse when it appears in
combination with the previously discussed doubt-avoiding tendency. The desire

[PDF PAGE 55]
to resist any change in a given conclusion or belief is particularly strong if a
person has invested a lot of effort in reaching that conclusion or belief and/or if
the change will result in something that is unpleasant. This is a major reason
why progress in many professions tends to advance “one funeral at a time.” An
example of this phenomenon can be found in the many companies which refused
to recognize that personal computers or mobile phones were a threat to their
business.
   Absence of the inconsistency-avoidance tendency among some people
operates to benefit society. For example, company founders who are not wedded
to old ideas can sometimes create innovative new businesses more easily. As
another example, an executive may cling to an idea he or she has publicly
advocated, even after facts come to light proving the idea false. One way to
avoid this problem is to be very careful about what you say in public. Also, be
aware that once you say something in public, you may be blind to disconfirming
evidence. Mark Twain’s statement comes to mind on this tendency: “All you
need in this life is ignorance and confidence; then success is sure.”7 Some
entrepreneurs often don’t know enough to think that something can’t be done, so
once in a while they actually do something that is completely unexpected. As the
old saying goes, even a blind squirrel finds a nut once in a while.

6. Curiosity Tendency
     Curiosity can provide both fun and wisdom, and occasionally trouble.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK, 2005


     I was born innately curious. If that doesn’t work for you, figure out your
     own damn system.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2010


     Experience tends to confirm a long-held notion that being prepared, on a
     few occasions in a lifetime, to act promptly in scale, in doing some simple
     and logical thing, will often dramatically improve the financial results of
     that lifetime. A few major opportunities, clearly recognizable as such, will
     usually come to one who continuously searches and waits, with a curious
     mind that loves diagnosis involving multiple variables. And then all that is
     required is a willingness to bet heavily when the odds are extremely
     favorable, using resources available as a result of prudence and patience in
     the past.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 1996

[PDF PAGE 56]
Many things in life involve tradeoffs. A source of what is good in life can also be
a source of what is bad in life. That inevitable tradeoff applies to curiosity—and
there is nothing like failure and mistakes to teach a person the right approach to
curiosity. The wise investor will acquire a sort of muscle memory about curiosity
based on actual experience. Curiosity about life and restraint about difficult
decisions are part of Munger’s approach to life. Seeking more information about
a topic, even though it has no present value to a person, is a natural human drive.
One can speculate that having this information has option value. However, the
price of too much curiosity can be high. Finding the right balance in things
involving tradeoffs like curiosity is a key part of acquiring wisdom.
   An example of a problem arising from too much curiosity would be a tycoon
who is curious to see whether he or she can finally be the person to make a long-
term profit in the airline business. There’s an old joke on this plan: “How do you
become a millionaire? Start as a billionaire and buy an airline.” Buffett himself
jokes that he has a toll-free number he can call which will talk him out of
investing in airlines whenever he gets the urge. Curiosity can also cause an
investor to engage in too many activities or a business owner to offer too many
products and services, but end up failing by offering none. Startup founders can
end up repeatedly “pivoting” their business (i.e., changing business models or
business categories) into oblivion if they overload on curiosity. At the same time,
curiosity can lead to important breakthroughs for a business. Striking the right
balance on something like curiosity requires judgment.

7. Kantian Fairness Tendency
     Modern acculturated man displays and expects from others a lot of fairness.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 2005


     The craving for perfect fairness causes a lot of terrible problems in system
     function. Some systems should be made deliberately unfair to individuals
     because they’ll be fairer on average for all of us.
      —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, SANTA BARBARA (UCSB), 2003


     Tolerating a little unfairness to some to get a greater fairness for all is a
     model I recommend to all of you.
                             —CHARLIE MUNGER, UCSB, 2003


Humans will often act irrationally to punish people who are not fair. In other

[PDF PAGE 57]
words, investors may react irrationally when presented with a situation that they
feel is unfair. For example, some people would rather lose money in an
investment than see another person benefit from unfairness. Another way this
tendency may arise is when people sometimes reject systems that are not fair to
an individual, even though the system in question is best for a group or society.
Munger points to such a rule in the U.S. Navy which dictates that your career is
over if you make a big mistake (e.g., if your ship goes aground) even if it was
not your fault. Munger believes that the rule is good for society because it
creates incentives for the naval officer to make sure that this does not happen,
even though it may not be fair to the individual. However, this is hard for many
people to accept due to the fairness heuristic, even though it may be logically
correct.


                          8. Envy/Jealousy Tendency

    A member of a species designed through evolutionary process to want often
    scarce food is going to be driven strongly toward getting food when it first
    sees food. And this is going to occur often and tend to create some conflict
    when the food is seen in the possession of another member of the same
    species. This is probably the evolutionary origin of the envy/jealousy
    tendency that lies so deep in human nature.
          —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA (USC), 1994


    The idea of caring that someone is making money faster [than you] is one
    of the deadly sins. Envy is a really stupid sin because it’s the only one you
    could never possibly have any fun at. There’s a lot of pain and no fun. Why
    would you want to get on that trolley?
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


    Missing out on some opportunity never bothers us. What’s wrong with
    someone getting a little richer than you? It’s crazy to worry about this.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2005


    Here’s one truth that perhaps your typical investment counselor would
    disagree with: if you’re comfortably rich and someone else is getting richer
    faster than you by, for example, investing in risky stocks, so what?!
    Someone will always be getting richer faster than you. This is not a tragedy.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2000

[PDF PAGE 58]
     Well, envy/jealousy made, what, two out of the Ten Commandments?
     Those of you who have raised siblings … or tried to run a law firm or
     investment bank or even a faculty, you know about envy. I’ve heard Warren
     say a half a dozen times, “It’s not greed that drives the world, but envy.”
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


     Remember, [Moses] said you couldn’t even covet your neighbor’s donkey.
                       —CHARLIE MUNGER, CNBC INTERVIEW, 2014


The dangers of envy are a frequent Munger topic, as you can see from the
extensive list of quotations above. Munger believes that envy is such a powerful
emotion because for most of human history people have lived in an environment
in which severe scarcity was the normal situation. He believes that very primal
emotions are triggered when humans see someone with something they don’t
have, often causing dysfunctional thoughts and actions. Envy is an emotion
designed to motivate people to acquire attributes and possessions that increase
evolutionary fitness. Now that there is less scarcity in the world, envy has lost
much of its value. Instead of motivating people for emotional fitness, envy just
makes people unhappy. Munger’s point on envy is simple: nothing good comes
from envy. He believes that envy is a completely wasted emotion that a person
should work hard to avoid.
   Major problems arising from envy happen because people increase risk when
they envy the financial success of someone else. The stock market is not going
to deliver you a sports car next week simply because your neighbor just acquired
one and you’re envious. Promoters of all sorts will point to the possessions of
others in an attempt to motive you to comply with their requests. Just saying no
to envy is the best approach.

9. Reciprocation Tendency
     The automatic tendency of humans to reciprocate favors and disfavors has
     long been noticed as extreme.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


Professor Robert Cialdini has pointed out that, “People will help if they owe you
for something you did in the past to advance their goals. That’s the rule of
reciprocity.”8 The reverse is also true if you have done something that negatively
affects a person. The urge to reciprocate favors and disfavors is so strong that
even someone smiling at you is hard not to reciprocate. The indebted feeling that

[PDF PAGE 59]
humans have when they receive a gift tends to make a person feel uncomfortable
until he or she can extinguish the debt. The urge to reciprocate in some way so as
to cancel the debt is so strong that it can even make people give up substantially
more than they would if the process was fully rational. In other words, the desire
to reciprocate often results in an unequal exchange of value. Compliance
professionals have learned to use this feeling of reciprocity to their advantage.
For example, a Hare Krishna fundraiser has been trained to give away a “gift,”
like a flower, when he or she approaches a person for a donation. The free
weekend at a time-share condominium has a similar purpose for the salespeople
who offer it to potential buyers. The investment promoter who gives away a
“free” lunch wants the person who attends the event to reciprocate in a very
disproportionate way. As an aside, a person who enjoys the free lunch and does
not take the bait and buy the investment may be disparaged by the promoter as a
“plate licker.”

10. Influence-from-Mere-Association Tendency
     Think how association, pure association, works. Take Coca-Cola Company
     (we’re the biggest shareholder). They want to be associated with every
     wonderful image: heroics in the Olympics, wonderful music, you name it.
     They don’t want to be associated with presidents’ funerals and so forth.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


Humans are programmed to be pattern seekers. They look for patterns to obtain
what they believe is guidance about how to make decisions. For example, when
a well-known actor pitches an investment firm’s services on television, it is
likely that the actor knows next to nothing about investing; yet people tend to
respond positively merely because the actor may be associated with something
positive, like acting skill. Unfortunately, people can be misled by mere
association too easily, and that can lead to investing errors. This tendency is
similar to the liking tendency, except only association is required. Liking
tendency is more about being blind to the faults of people we like. With
association theory, the compliance professional is trying to get you to do
something like buy a financial service because it is endorsed or used by a famous
actor. Because compliance professionals know this human weakness, advertisers
spend huge amounts of money to associate their products and services with
favorable images. Munger believes that advertisers want customers to respond to
images in a manner similar to Pavlov’s dog. For example, See’s Candies wants

[PDF PAGE 60]
you to associate their products with pleasant memories from the past. Also, the
fact that an engagement ring from Acme is not perceived to have the same value
as an engagement ring from Tiffany is not an accident. However, a celebrity
endorsement of an investment should have no impact on your investing
decisions.
   Influence from association can also work in reverse, such as when a person is
unfairly connected to something unfavorable they did not cause. An example of
this is the Persian messenger syndrome (also known as “shoot the messenger”).
There is significant danger inherent in this syndrome because people, often
executives or politicians, may surround themselves with people who only tell
them what they want to hear. Munger pointed to Bill Paley of CBS as an
example of someone who put himself in a cocoon of unreality and suffered a
major business failure as a result.

11. Simple, Pain-Avoiding Psychological Denial
    One should recognize reality even when one doesn’t like it.
                —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2000


    A friend of our family had a super-athlete, super-student son who flew off a
    carrier in the north Atlantic and never came back, and his mother, who was
    a very sane woman, just never believed that he was dead. And, of course, if
    you turn on the television, you’ll find the mothers of the most obvious
    criminals that man could ever diagnose, and they all think their sons are
    innocent. That’s simple psychological denial. The reality is too painful to
    bear, so you just distort it until it’s bearable. We all do that to some extent,
    and it’s a common psychological misjudgment that causes terrible
    problems.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


    A projection prepared by anybody who stands to earn a commission or an
    executive trying to justify a particular course of action will frequently be a
    lie—although it’s not a deliberate lie in most cases. The man has come to
    believe it himself. And that’s the worst kind. Projections should be handled
    with care, particularly when they’re being provided by someone who has an
    interest in misleading you.
                —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 1995


    Failure to handle psychological denial is a common way for people to go

[PDF PAGE 61]
     broke.
                      —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


People hate to hear bad news or anything inconsistent with their existing
opinions and conclusions. For this reason, if something is potentially painful, the
human brain often goes to work trying to deny reality. Nobel Prize-winning
psychologist Daniel Kahneman believes that “[people do not invest even] the
smallest amount trying to actually figure out what they’ve done wrong—not an
accident: they don’t want to know.”9 For example, smart investors should have
known that it was not possible for Bernard Madoff’s fund to generate not only
positive but amazingly consistent returns. What were Madoff’s investors
thinking when, month after month, they received financial statements that were
positive with little volatility? Madoff investors were so happy with the results
that they simply distorted reality. In short, the investors liked the results they saw
on the statements from Madoff so much that they went into a state of
psychological denial. Even a professor who wrote a scholarly book on gullibility
was an investor in the Bernard Madoff Ponzi scheme.
   A common example of psychological denial happens when people make
projections about a potential investment. Weirdly, sometimes the fewer facts
there are to support a well-told story, the more believable it may be for certain
investors. Only when real facts start to appear do these people start to question
the story. Daniel Kahneman pointed this out: “It’s all too easy to tell stories that
make sense of one’s life in retrospect.”10 This is why it’s particularly dangerous
to short a so-called story stock. Another example that Munger has cited for the
psychological denial tendency at work is academics who love the beauty of
mathematics. The mathematics of certainty (e.g., trigonometry, geometry) is so
much better put together than the messy world of statistics and decision making
under conditions of uncertainty. The love of this beautiful math can cause these
academics to ignore the fact that the assumptions which form the basis of their
mathematics are flawed.

12. Excessive Self-regard Tendency
     We don’t like complexity and we distrust other systems and think it many
     times leads to false confidence. The harder you work, the more confidence
     you get. But you may be working hard on something that is false.
                        —CHARLIE MUNGER, SEEKING WISDOM, 2003


People tend to vastly overestimate their own capabilities. This is a huge problem

[PDF PAGE 62]
for many investors and a major part of the reason why staying within a circle of
competence is so important. This book has made the point repeatedly that the
most effective way to genuinely reduce risk is to know what you’re doing. Part
of being a genuine expert is to know the limits of your own competence.
Unfortunately, this is far too often not the case. Daniel Kahneman believes:
“Confidence is a feeling, one determined mostly by the coherence of the story
and by the ease with which it comes to mind, even when the evidence for the
story is sparse and unreliable. The bias toward coherence favors overconfidence.
An individual who expresses high confidence probably has a good story, which
may or may not be true.”11
   In responding to a survey, 70 percent of students said they were above average
in leadership ability, and only 2 percent rated themselves as below average in
relation to their peers.12 In rating their athletic skills, 60 percent saw themselves
above the median and only 6 percent below the median. Companies are not
immune from this excessive self-regard tendency, including Berkshire’s portfolio
companies:

     [GEICO] got to thinking that, because they were making a lot of money,
     they knew everything. And they suffered huge losses. All they had to do
     was to cut out all the folly and go back to the perfectly wonderful business
     that was lying there.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


In making his point about the excessive self-regard tendency, Munger noted that
way more than half of Swedish drivers think they are above-average drivers:

     Investment counselors make Swedish drivers sound like depressives.
     Virtually every investment expert’s public assessment is that he is above
     average, no matter what is the evidence to the contrary.
               —CHARLIE MUNGER, SPEECH TO FOUNDATION OFFICERS, 1998


Investors themselves share this same overconfidence. In 2012, a major fund
group released a survey indicating that 91 percent of their active investors
believe that they would beat or at least equal the returns of the market over the
next year.13 This, of course, is mathematically impossible.

13. OverOptimism Tendency

[PDF PAGE 63]
     In the 4th century B.C., Demosthenes noted that “what a man wishes, he
     will believe.” And in self-appraisals of prospects and talents it’s the norm,
     as Demosthenes predicted, for people to be ridiculously overoptimistic.
                        —CHARLIE MUNGER, PHILANTHROPY, 1999


Investor overoptimism—and its evil twin, over-pessimism—are what make Mr.
Market bipolar. The good news for people who can keep their level of optimism
at rational levels is that the unpredictable but inevitable gyrations between these
two states create opportunities for Graham value investors. Staying rationally
optimistic as the market gyrates is very difficult. Only a small number of people
can do it successfully. Even experts who spend their lives studying behavioral
economics can fall prey to the overoptimism and over-pessimism tendencies. For
example, Nobel Prize winner Daniel Kahneman wrote this:

     One of our biases is that we can ignore the lessons of experience. A group
     of people compiling a report will estimate they can do it in a year, even
     though every other similar report has taken comparable groups five years.
     … When I started the book I told Richard Thaler (the author of Nudge) that
     I had 18 months to finish it. He laughed hysterically and said, “You have
     written about that, haven’t you? It’s not going to work the way you expect.”
     “How long did it take you?” I ask. “Four years, and it was very painful.”14

If someone who has spent his life studying dysfunctional decision-making falls
prey to the same problems he studies (e.g., overoptimism), these tendencies are
indeed strong.

14. Deprival Super-Reaction Tendency
     The deprival super-reaction syndrome of man helps cause much ruin as
     people’s cognition is distorted as a result of their suffering losses and near
     misses.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, STANFORD LAW SCHOOL, 1998


     Your brain doesn’t naturally know how to think the way Zeckhauser knows
     how to play bridge. For example, people do not react symmetrically to loss
     and gain. Well, maybe a great bridge player like Zeckhauser does, but that’s
     a trained response.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995

[PDF PAGE 64]
     I mean people are really crazy about minor decrements down. … Huge
     insanities can come from just subconsciously overweighing the importance
     of what you’re losing or almost getting and not getting.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


The deprival super-reaction tendency is more commonly called loss aversion,
and it can cause investors to irrationally avoid risk when they face potential for
gain, but irrationally seek risk when there is a potential for loss. In other words,
people tend to be too conservative in seeking gains and too aggressive in seeking
to avoid losses. The most important point to remember about this tendency is
that it causes investors to do things like sell stocks too early and hold on to them
for too long. It is very common for investors to hold on to losing stocks in the
hope that somehow the price will rise and they will somehow break even. As
another example of this tendency at work, many investors were so traumatized
by stock losses after the 2007 financial crisis that they completely missed the
subsequent rally in the markets.

     One of prospect theory’s most important contributions to finance is loss
     aversion, the idea that, for most people, losses loom larger than
     corresponding gains. The empirical evidence suggests we feel losses about
     two to two-and-a-half times more than we feel gains.
                    —MICHAEL MAUBOUSSIN, AVER AND AVERSION, 2005


A good example of how loss aversion creates dysfunctional behavior happens at
the racetrack. People betting on horses bet more and more on longshots as the
day goes on. This happens because the majority of people have lost money
because, with the odds stacked in favor of the house, the racetrack has the
betting edge. Because people are averse to losses, as the day progresses they bet
more on long shots in the hope that they can recoup their losses and perhaps
generate a gain before they go home.

15. Social-Proof Tendency
     Big-shot businessmen get into these waves of social proof. Do you
     remember some years ago when an oil company bought a fertilizer
     company, and every other major oil company practically ran out and bought
     a fertilizer company? And there was no more damned reason for all these
     oil companies to buy fertilizer companies, but they didn’t know exactly
     what to do, and if Exxon was doing it, it was good enough for Mobil, and

[PDF PAGE 65]
    vice versa. I think they’re all gone now, but it was a total disaster.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


    This brings to mind Ben Graham’s paradoxical observation that good ideas
    cause more investment mischief than bad ideas. He had it right. It’s so easy
    for us all to push a really good idea to wretched excess, as in the case of the
    Florida land bubble or the “nifty fifty” corporate stocks. Then mix in a little
    “social-proof” (from other experts), and brains (including ours) often turn
    to mush.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


Humans have a natural tendency to follow a herd of other humans. In other
words, because humans do not have unlimited time and complete information,
they tend to copy the behavior of other humans. Cialdini put it this way: “One
means we use to determine what is correct is to find out what other people think
is correct. We view a behavior as more correct … to the degree we see others
performing it.”15
   Social-proof tendency is one major cause of financial bubbles. Social-proof
tendency is often used by fraudsters. For example, Bernie Madoff was a master
at using social-proof tendency to get investors to give him their money. He
worked hard to make it known that he managed money for famous people who
were considered to be “smart money.” One odd fact of life is that people tend to
follow famous investors into deals even though the famous person is not even
remotely famous for his or her investing skill. Learning to ignore the crowd and
think independently is a trained response.
   Munger is a big proponent of independent thinking in investing. In thinking
independently, it’s wise to remember Seth Klarman’s view that a Graham value
investor is a marriage between a contrarian and a calculator. Falling in with the
crowd due to social proof means it is mathematically impossible to outperform
the market. Independent thinking can be an opportunity to arbitrage the tendency
of people to follow the crowd. Profit can be made by sometimes zigging when
the crowd zags if you see a wager in which the odds are substantially in your
favor. It is not enough to be contrarian; you must also be sufficiently right in
terms of the magnitude of the positive outcome that you outperform the markets.

16. Contrast-Misreaction Tendency
    Because the nervous system of man does not naturally measure in absolute
    scientific units, it must instead rely on something simpler. The eyes have a

[PDF PAGE 66]
     solution that limits their programming needs: the contrast in what is seen is
     registered. And as in sight, so does it go, largely, in the other senses.
     Moreover, as perception goes, so goes cognition. The result is man’s
     Contrast-Misreaction Tendency. Few psychological tendencies do more
     damage to correct thinking. Small-scale damages involve instances such as
     man’s buying an overpriced $1,000 leather dashboard merely because the
     price is so low compared to his concurrent purchase of a $65,000 car.
     Large-scale damages often ruin lives, as when a wonderful woman having
     terrible parents marries a man who would be judged satisfactory only in
     comparison to her parents. Or as when a man takes wife number two, who
     would be appraised as alright only in comparison to wife number one.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


Munger points to real estate brokers who may first show clients unattractive
properties at inflated prices in order to increase the probability that clients will
buy a subsequently viewed property at an inflated price as an example of this
tendency. In other words, if your real estate broker starts the tour with a dog of a
deal, they are very likely trying to train you to buy what is coming next. No one
should buy an investment merely because it’s better than the lousy one you just
saw or owned. Similarly, when you buy an asset, it should be the best investment
of all the investments that are available to you anywhere. For example, the fact
that Y is a better stock than X is not enough information to make an investing
decision. Is Y the best investment of all the investments you could possibly
make anywhere? Thinking about the world through an opportunity-cost lens is a
simple but often-ignored idea.

17. Stress-Influence Tendency
     Here my favorite example is the great Pavlov. He had all these dogs in
     cages, which had all been conditioned into changed behaviors, and the great
     Leningrad flood came and it just went right up and the dog is in a cage. And
     the dog had as much stress as you can imagine a dog ever having. And the
     water receded in time to save some of the dogs, and Pavlov noted that
     they’d had a total reversal of their conditioned personality.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


Some level of stress can actually increase a person’s performance. However,
people under too much stress tend to make really lousy decisions. For example, a
salesperson with highly developed compliance skills can cause people to make

[PDF PAGE 67]
big investment mistakes by putting the sales prospect under stress. One of the
more infamous examples of this sales approach is the sale of a time-share in a
resort condominium. Often, a friendly salesperson operates in tandem with a
person who specializes in applying stress (this is known as a “good-cop/bad-
cop” approach). I would rather drop a cinder block on my foot than accept a free
weekend in a time-share condominium. Do not make decisions while under
stress. It’s just that simple.

18. Availability-Misweighing Tendency
     The great algorithm to remember in dealing with this tendency is simple: an
     idea or a fact is not worth more merely because it’s easily available to you.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


   Investors have a tendency to make decisions based on what they can easily
recall. The more vivid and memorable the event, fact, or phenomenon may be,
the more likely it will be used by the investor in making a decision—even if
what is being recalled is not the best data on which to make a decision. For
example, if stocks have recently dramatically fallen in a market crash, investors
tend to be afraid to buy, even though it may be the very best time to buy. The
year 2002 was an excellent time to buy stocks, but the memory of the crash of
the stock market after the collapse of the Internet bubble was so vivid that only
people who, like Munger, had trained themselves to overcome this tendency
were able to use that opportunity to reap big investing rewards.
   Similarly, if someone has recently and publicly cashed in with a huge financial
return on a startup, other people who learn about that success tend to
overestimate their chances of success in creating their own startup. People are
also more likely to buy stocks if the markets have been rising in price
significantly. This psychological tendency to misweigh what is easily recalled is
a major reason why people are attracted to lotteries despite the dismal odds of
winning, as they have seen other ordinary people win a lottery on the news.
Lotteries promote this love by distributing pictures to the press of people holding
oversized checks.

19. Use-It-or-Lose-It Tendency
     All skills attenuate with disuse. I was a whiz at calculus until age twenty,
     after which the skill was soon obliterated by total nonuse.

[PDF PAGE 68]
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


This tendency is pretty simple to understand; a skill degrades unless it is
practiced regularly. For example, flying an airplane is not something you should
do once in a while. If you’re not flying often as a pilot, you should not be flying
as a pilot. Similarly, investing is not something you want to do once in a while.
In the context of investing, it is both a fact of life and a shame that so many
people spend more time picking out an appliance than picking an investment or
investment fund. To be a successful investor, a person must regularly devote the
necessary time and effort. Even if you once felt that you knew a lot about
investing, it does not mean your skills are current. Maintaining a circle of
competence requires constant work and diligence. As a 2014 study concluded,

     We find that interventions to improve financial literacy explain only 0.1%
     of the variance in financial behaviors studied, with weaker effects in low-
     income samples. Like other education, financial education decays over
     time; even large interventions with many hours of instruction have
     negligible effects on behavior 20 months or more from the time of
     intervention.
           —DANIEL FERNANDES, JOHN LYNCH, AND RICHARD NETEMEYER, 2014


20. Drug-Misinfluence Tendency
     We all know talented people who have ruined their lives abusing either
     alcohol or drugs—and often both.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD-WESTLAKE SCHOOL, 1986


     Three things ruin people: drugs, liquor, and leverage.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2009


     The four closest friends of my youth were highly intelligent, ethical,
     humorous types, favored in person and background. Two are long dead,
     with alcohol a contributing factor, and a third is a living alcoholic—if you
     call that living. While susceptibility varies, addiction can happen to any of
     us, through a subtle process where the bonds of degradation are too light to
     be felt until they are too strong to be broken. And I have yet to meet
     anyone, in over six decades of life, whose life was worsened by overfear
     and overavoidance of such a deceptive pathway to destruction.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD-WESTLAKE SCHOOL, 1986

[PDF PAGE 69]
Everyone makes mistakes, but Munger has repeatedly said that staying away
from the really big mistakes, like cocaine and heroin, is vital. As an analogy,
Munger has pointed out that if you are floating down a river and there are really
dangerous whirlpools that are killing many people on a daily basis, you do not
go anywhere near that whirlpool. Munger also pointed to alcoholism as a major
cause of failure in life. His point on substance abuse is simple: why play dice
with something that can ruin your life forever? His timeless advice in every
setting is to avoid situations with a massive downside and a small upside
(negative optionality). This is the reciprocal of his investing advice: seek bets
with a huge upside and a small downside (positive optionality). Other
tendencies, such as psychological denial, can prevent people from getting the
help they need, making matters worse for people with drug or alcohol problems.
A drug or alcohol problem can quickly become a self-reinforcing negative
feedback loop, which is impossible to escape.

21. Senescence-Misinfluence Tendency
     Some people remain pretty good in maintaining intensely practiced old
     skills until late in life, as one can notice in many a bridge tournament. …
     Continuous thinking and learning, done with joy, can somewhat help delay
     what is inevitable.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


Munger’s own life is support for the view that if you have the right genetics and
consciously work hard to remain physically and mentally active, you can stay
sharp as you age. Luck certainly plays an important part in outcomes related to
aging, but there is no excuse for not working to do the best you can with the luck
you have. Staying active is essential to mental and physical health. As just one
example, nothing is more fun for people like Munger than learning—and nothing
helps learning more than reading. When it comes to health, do not be passive. As
an example of Munger not accepting deteriorating health passively, when he was
confronted with a diagnosis that he might lose all of his sight, he began studying
Braille. It is far better to wear out from work than rust out from inactivity.

22. Authority-Misinfluence Tendency
     You get a pilot and a co-pilot. The pilot is the authority figure. They don’t

[PDF PAGE 70]
     do this in airplanes, but they’ve done it in simulators. They have the pilot
     do something where the co-pilot, who’s been trained in simulators a long
     time—he knows he’s not to allow the plane to crash—they have the pilot do
     something where an idiot co-pilot would know the plane was going to
     crash, but the pilot’s doing it, and the co-pilot is sitting there, and the pilot
     is the authority figure. 25 percent of the time, the plane crashes. I mean, this
     is a very powerful psychological tendency.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


People tend to follow people who they believe are authorities, especially when
they face risk, uncertainty, or ignorance. Professor Cialdini described the
authority tendency this way: “When people are uncertain … they don’t look
inside themselves for answers—all they see is ambiguity and their own lack of
confidence. Instead, they look outside for sources of information that can reduce
their uncertainty. The first thing they look to is authority.”16 Compliance
professionals have learned to convey their authority before they start working to
influence people. For example, they will talk about their professional degrees,
awards, and achievements. They might even talk about how wealthy they are or
refer to other authorities who endorse their expertise. Professor Cialdini noted
that titles, expensive clothing, and the trappings of a professional all tend to be
effective in conveying authority. Michael Mauboussin pointed out that, “The
individual who comes across as more authoritative is actually more believable.
People are much more comfortable deferring to the person in the pinstripe suit
with the PowerPoint slides.”17 In the famous Milgram experiments, people
complied with instructions to apply electric shocks to other people in an
experiment because the person giving the command was wearing a laboratory
coat and looked like an authority.18 Unfortunately, someone like a stock promoter
in a fancy suit and expensive car may seem like an authority to some investors.
The church official who asserts that the investment is ethical may overcome
rather obvious ethical concerns merely because he or she seems to be an
authority on ethics.

23. Twaddle Tendency
     It’s obvious that if a company generates high returns on capital and
     reinvests at high returns, it will do well. But this wouldn’t sell books, so
     there’s a lot of twaddle and fuzzy concepts that have been introduced that
     don’t add much.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2000

[PDF PAGE 71]
     I think the notion that liquidity of tradable common stock is a great
     contributor to capitalism is mostly twaddle. The liquidity gives us these
     crazy booms, so it has as many problems as virtues.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


The definition of twaddle is simple; it is speech or writing that is silly or not
true; nonsense. Prattle has an equally simple definition: to talk in a foolish way.
What Munger is saying is that people tend to spend a lot of time on meaningless
activities. To illustrate the point, he gives the example of a honeybee that knows
that the flowers are directly over the hive but has no way to convey that using its
dance-based signaling. Despite the fact that no information is being conveyed,
the honeybee will still dance in a way that conveys nothing.

     I try to get rid of people who always confidently answer questions about
     which they don’t have any real knowledge. To me they are like the bee
     dancing its incoherent dance. They are just screwing up the hive.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO MEETING NOTES, 1998


Like the honeybee with flowers located directly overhead, many experts who are
faced with a situation they know nothing about will prattle and twaddle anyway.
In Munger’s view, people too often confuse twaddle and prattle with importance
and value. Even worse, many people pay fees to consultants and advisors for
twaddle and prattle. Of course, the hardest thing to spot is when you are telling
yourself twaddle, because the easiest person to fool is always yourself.

24. Reason-Respecting Tendency
     Reason-Respecting Tendency is so strong that even a person’s giving of
     meaningless or incorrect reasons will increase compliance with his orders
     and requests. This has been demonstrated in psychology experiments
     wherein “compliance practitioners” successfully jump to the head of the
     lines in front of copying machines by explaining their reason: “I have to
     make some copies.” This sort of unfortunate byproduct of Reason-
     Respecting Tendency is a conditioned reflex, based on a widespread
     appreciation of the importance of reasons. And, naturally, the practice of
     laying out various claptrap reasons is much used by commercial and cult
     “compliance practitioners” to help them get what they don’t deserve.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995

[PDF PAGE 72]
Compliance professionals know they will have more success in convincing
people to act against their personal interest if the person is given a reason for the
action, even if the reason is absurd. As an example, so-called boiler-room
operators pitching sham investments have their cold-calling salespeople working
from scripts heavy with reasons designed to get people to comply with requests
to buy into scams, like promoted penny stocks. Salespeople have learned they
can raise their closing percentage if they give a fake reason that the buyer may
lose the opportunity to buy if they wait any longer. A scam artist might say, “You
should buy this penny gold-mining stock because it is wedding season in India”
or “The weather in South Africa has been poor, and that is great news for gold
mines in the United States.” Yet another example would be a meaningless
pattern in a chart of stock prices that has been given a name, like a “death cross.”
Even panhandlers know to put the reason they need money on their cardboard
signs. Just because someone gives you a reason for doing something stupid does
not make it smart. A story might help readers understand this point:

     A Wall Street analyst and his client, a stock speculator, went to the horse
     races together one day. The speculator suggested that they bet $5,000 on a
     horse. The analyst explained that he would instead research each horse and
     only bet after doing a careful analysis. “You are too theoretical,” said the
     speculator walking off to place his bet.

As it happened, the horse did finish first. The speculator triumphantly exclaimed,
“I told you. I have a secret formula!”
   “What’s your secret formula?” the analyst asked.
   “It’s simple. I have two kids, two and six years old. I sum up their ages and I
bet on number nine.”
   “But, two plus six is eight,” protested the analyst.
   “I told you, you are too theoretical!” the broker replied.

25. Lollapalooza Tendency
     An investment decision in the common stock of a company frequently
     involves a whole lot of factors interacting. … The one thing that causes the
     most trouble is when you combine a bunch of these together, you get this
     lollapalooza effect.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995

[PDF PAGE 73]
The lollapalooza tendency is the tendency to get extreme confluences of
psychological tendencies acting in favor of a particular outcome. Munger
believes that all of the tendencies, forces, and phenomena described previously
in this book can interact with each other in self-reinforcing ways, which make
the output of the whole of what is interacting greater than the sum of the parts.
Munger calls this process a lollapalooza. Because a lollapalooza involves
feedback, its impact can be nonlinear in nature and is inherently unpredictable.
Munger has pointed out that that the impact of a lollapalooza involves vastly
more than simple addition of the components that are interacting. Munger
instead described it as similar to a “nuclear explosion.” One reason why
prediction with certainty with respect to a lollapalooza is impossible is that a
certain critical mass is required. In other words, the process that creates a
lollapalooza will either reach critical mass, as in a nuclear reaction, or will never
reveal itself.
   Munger has identified a number of lollapalooza examples. In his view, the
2007 financial crisis “was a lollapalooza event—a confluence of causes; that is
how complex systems work.”19 Long-Term Capital Credit Management’s
financial implosion was also a lollapalooza event, according to Munger. He also
thinks the rise and fall of the Internet bubble was a lollapalooza. Another
example of a lollapalooza is a Tupperware party where social proof, liking, and
other tendencies are used by the company to get people to buy products. Munger
wrote an essay about the brand power of Coca-Cola, describing its tremendous
value as being the outcome of a lollapalooza phenomenon. An open-outcry
auction is another example of a lollapalooza:

     Well, the open-outcry auction is just made to turn the brain into mush:
     you’ve got social proof, the other guy is bidding, you get reciprocation
     tendency, you get deprival super-reaction syndrome, and the thing is going
     away. … I mean, it just absolutely is designed to manipulate people into
     idiotic behavior.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


  The techniques that an auctioneer can use for benevolent purposes in a charity
auction can also be used by a criminal to convince people to invest in scams.
Buffett’s advice for these open outcry auctions is simple: “Don’t go.”
  A lollapalooza is not inherently good or bad. Sometimes a lollapalooza effect
can be used for benevolent purposes.

[PDF PAGE 74]
     The system of Alcoholics Anonymous: a 50 percent no-drinking rate
     outcome when everything else fails? It’s a very clever system that uses four
     or five psychological systems at once toward, I might say, a very good end.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


   However, Munger also believes that the same forces used by Alcoholics
Anonymous to help people with alcoholism have been used by cults for evil. For
example, Charles Manson and other cult leaders learned to manipulate people
through a lollapalooza process. Clearly, Bernie Madoff used multiple self-
reinforcing tendencies, like social proof and envy, to motivate the victims of his
Ponzi scheme. Munger believes Moonie “conversions” are achieved by
combining psychological tendencies. On the positive side, Munger also cites
Buffett’s investing record as an example of a positive lollapalooza.

     A confluence of factors in the same direction caused Warren’s success. It’s
     very unlikely that a lollapalooza effect can come from anything else.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2007


   I hope that reading this book will help you generate your own positive
lollapalooza.

[PDF PAGE 75]
                                         5
                          THE RIGHT STUFF


IN HIS BIOGRAPHY of Warren Buffett, Roger Lowenstein pointed out that Buffett’s
“genius was largely a genius of character—of patience, discipline and rationality.
… His talent sprang from his unrivaled independence of mind and ability to
focus on his work and shut out the world.” The same things can be said about
Charlie Munger. Both of these investors are extraordinary individuals. There is
only one Charlie Munger and one Warren Buffett. Having said that, you don’t
need to have exactly the same attributes as these two longtime partners to
marginally improve your skills as an investor. You can improve your ability to
read, think, learn, avoid mistakes, and pay attention to the personal attributes that
drive success.
   This chapter identifies a few of the attributes that make up “the right stuff” of
a successful investor, as identified over the years by Munger. Although he almost
certainly feels that other attributes are important too, the ones in this chapter
have been discussed most extensively and frequently by Munger. He admits that
he struggles with these attributes, just like everyone else. No one is perfect,
including Munger. Therefore, my intent is not to create a subtext of “just do it,”
since doing these things in our daily lives is genuinely hard.

1. Patient
     Success means being very patient but aggressive when it’s time.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


     It would be nice if [finding great investments] happened all the time.
     Unfortunately, it doesn’t.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2005


     We don’t feel some compulsion to swing. We’re perfectly willing to wait
     for something decent to come along. In certain periods, we have a hell of a
     time finding places to invest our money.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2001

[PDF PAGE 76]
     Patience combined with opportunity is a great thing to have. My
     grandfather taught me that opportunity is infrequent and one has to be ready
     when it strikes. That’s what Berkshire is.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2011


     We are both very action prone when it’s obvious.
                       —CHARLIE MUNGER, CNBC INTERVIEW, 2014


The probability that you will encounter an asset that can be purchased at a
significant discount from private market value is significantly higher when Mr.
Market is fearful. However, Munger believes that predicting exactly when this
will happen is impossible. Instead, his approach is to wait for bargains to appear,
focusing on whatever is happening in the present moment. Therefore, a Graham
value investor must be patient. This can be very difficult, as there is a tendency
to think that the level of activity is somehow correlated with value. “Don’t just
sit there; do something,” is precisely the wrong advice for a Graham value
investor.
   Buffett has said that the stock market is designed to transfer money “from the
active to the patient.”1 If you are patient, rational, and otherwise follow the
Graham value investing system, Mr. Market will inevitably deliver his financial
gifts to you. You cannot predict when it will happen, but you can certainly wait
patiently for the gift to be transferred to you. In this sense, the Graham value
investing system is a discovery-based process rather than a prediction-based
process.
   Munger told a story about a young person who once asked him how to get
rich. He described the conversation as follows:

     We get these questions a lot from the enterprising young. It’s a very
     intelligent question: you look at some old guy who is rich and you ask,
     “How can I become like you, except faster?”
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


   The approach Munger suggested was to patiently “slug it out” day-by-day,
preparing for occasional fast spurts. The idea that one can make a lot of money
in just a few instances after being patient in other instances is something Munger
developed playing poker in the U.S. Army. Munger ascribes no small amount of
his financial success in investing to the time he spent playing poker and bridge.

[PDF PAGE 77]
     The right way to think is the way Zeckhauser plays bridge. It’s just that
     simple.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD LAW SCHOOL, 1995


   At a fundamental level, investing is just one form of making a bet. It is
essential, however, that the bet be made in a way that is investing (net present
value positive) rather than gambling (net present value negative). As I noted
previously, investing is a probabilistic exercise and experience with other games
of chance can be helpful. The great bridge player and Harvard professor Richard
Zeckhauser pointed out:

     Bridge requires a continual effort to assess probabilities in at best
     marginally knowable situations, and players need to make hundreds of
     decisions in a single session, often balancing expected gains and losses. But
     players must also continually make peace with good decisions that lead to
     bad outcomes, both one’s own decisions and those of a partner. Just this
     peacemaking skill is required if one is to invest wisely in an unknowable
     world.
                              —RICHARD ZECKHAUSER, 2006


   Buffett believes that bridge shares many characteristics with investing. Every
hand is different, yet what has happened in the past is meaningful. In investing,
you must make inferences about every bid or card, as well as cards that are not
played. Also, as in bridge, you can benefit from having a great partner and
strong interpersonal skills. Understanding probability and statistics is essential in
both card playing and investing. Munger put it simply:

     If you don’t get elementary probability into your repertoire, you go through
     a long life like a one-legged man in an ass-kicking contest.
       —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA (USC) SCHOOL OF
                                 BUSINESS, 1995


2. Disciplined
     We have this investment discipline of waiting for a fat pitch. If I was
     offered the chance to go into business where people would measure me
     against benchmarks, force me to be fully invested, crawl around looking
     over my shoulder, etc., I would hate it. I would regard it as putting me into
     shackles.

[PDF PAGE 78]
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


     We both insist on a lot of time being available almost every day to just sit
     and think. That is very uncommon in American business. We read and
     think. So Warren and I do more reading and thinking and less doing than
     most people in business.
                           —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER, 2005


     You need patience, discipline, and an ability to take losses and adversity
     without going crazy.
                           —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER, 2005


     We’ve got great flexibility and a certain discipline in terms of not doing
     some foolish thing just to be active—discipline in avoiding just doing any
     damn thing just because you can’t stand inactivity.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2000


     I think it’s possible for a great many people to live a life like that where
     there isn’t much risk of disaster and where they’re virtually sure to get
     ahead a reasonable amount. It takes a lot of judgment, a lot of discipline,
     and an absence of hyperactivity. By this method, I think most intelligent
     people can take a lot of risk out of life.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


Being a Graham value investor requires discipline. It is so much easier
emotionally to follow the crowd than to be a contrarian. In addition, many
investors find it very difficult to do nothing. People tend to think there is a bonus
for activity in investing, when there most certainly is not. Fighting this tendency
can result in a big payoff because there is a penalty on being overactive due to
the associated taxes, fees, and expenses.
   Robert Hagstrom wrote in The Warren Buffett Way: “The difference between
Warren Buffett and most investors has more to do with discipline than just about
any other quality.”2 The same thing can be said about Munger, and there is no
question that it is a trained response that will atrophy if you don’t work on it.
Howard Marks agreed on the importance of discipline:

     Only a strong sense of value will give you the discipline needed to take
     profits on a highly appreciated asset that everyone thinks will rise nonstop,
     or the guts to hold and average down in a crisis even as prices go lower
     every day. Of course, for your efforts in these regards to be profitable, your

[PDF PAGE 79]
    estimate of value has to be on target.
                  —HOWARD MARKS, THE MOST IMPORTANT THING, 2011


   Looking for signs of genuine discipline in others can be helpful in making
wise decisions. For example, if you visit a money management firm that claims
to be a Graham value investor and you cannot tell whether the market is open or
closed, that is a good sign. Speculators correlate activity with productivity or
success, whereas Graham value investors correlate disciplined inactivity with
success.

3. Calm but Courageous and Decisive
    I think there’s something to be said for developing the disposition to own
    stocks without fretting.
                —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


    We fret way earlier than other people. We left a lot of money on the table
    through early fretting. It’s the way we are—you’ll just have to live with it.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2001


    If you’re not willing to react with equanimity to a market price decline of
    50 percent two or three times a century, you’re not fit to be a common
    shareholder and you deserve the mediocre result you’re going to get
    compared to the people who do have the temperament, who can be more
    philosophical about these market fluctuations.
                       —CHARLIE MUNGER, BBC INTERVIEW, 2010


    If you want to get rich, you’ll need a few decent ideas where you really
    know what you’re doing. Then you’ve got to have the courage to stick with
    them and take the ups and downs. Not very complicated, and it’s very old-
    fashioned.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAILY JOURNAL MEETING, 2013


    You will get a few opportunities to profit from finding underpricing. There
    are actually people out there who don’t price everything as high as the
    market will easily stand. And once you figure that out, it’s like finding
    money in the street—if you have the courage of your convictions.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994

[PDF PAGE 80]
     It’s amazing how fast Berkshire acts when we find opportunity. You can’t
     be timid—and that applies to all of life.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2011


Courage is an essential part of success in the Graham value investing system. If
you are trying to outperform the market, mathematics dictates that you must
deviate from the view of the crowd. For most people, being a contrarian requires
courage. If you do not want to be courageous or do not believe you have the
ability to be courageous under pressure, you should buy a portfolio of low-fee
index funds and exchange-traded funds. To profit from courage, you often must
have some cash on hand. Having that cash available when the crisis hits also
requires courage because it’s hard to sit on cash when markets are rising. The
human urge to avoid missing out is a powerful one that can drive investors into
the deadly grip of a stock market bubble.
   If you are a Graham value investor, the best times for you are the worst times
for other investors and speculators. John Templeton put it this way: “To buy
when others are despondently selling and to sell when others are euphorically
buying takes the greatest courage but provides the greatest profit.”3
   Market returns will always be lumpy for any investor, especially in the stock
market. Drops in the prices of stocks are inevitable, and it is precisely then that
people tend to panic and want to sell. Munger has experienced this several times
in his lifetime, so he is not guessing on this point.
   Munger suggests that investors be patient while at the same time being
aggressive and decisive when the right opportunity is located. He believes that
an investor has an advantage over many professionals in this way. Although
professionals may have better and more current information about a given
investment, they are under huge pressure to do something even if the best thing
to do is nothing. As an example of this attribute in action, during the first quarter
of 2009, when most everyone was still panicking from the financial crisis,
Munger took the excess cash available in the accounts of the Daily Journal and
plowed it into bank stocks. His timing was excellent. He had waited patiently for
the right opportunity to arise and, when he saw what he wanted, he acted
decisively and aggressively.

     We just put the money in. It didn’t take any novel thought. It was a once-in-
     40-year opportunity. You have to strike the right balance between
     competency or knowledge on the one hand and gumption on the other. Too
     much competency and no gumption is no good. And if you don’t know your
     circle of competence, then too much gumption will get you killed. But the

[PDF PAGE 81]
     more you know the limits to your knowledge, the more valuable gumption
     is. For most professional money managers, if you’ve got four children to
     put through college and you’re earning $400,000 or $1 million or whatever,
     the last thing in the world you would want to be worried about is having
     gumption. You care about survival, and the way you survive is just not
     doing anything that might make you stand out.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, JASON ZWEIG INTERVIEW, 2014



         4. Reasonably Intelligent but Not Misled by Their High IQs

     A lot of people with high IQs are terrible investors because they’ve got
     terrible temperaments.
                           —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER, 2005


     You need to have a passionate interest in why things are happening. That
     cast of mind, kept over long periods, gradually improves your ability to
     focus on reality. If you don’t have the cast of mind, you’re destined for
     failure even if you have a high IQ.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


     Very-high-IQ people can be completely useless—and many of them are.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2010


   Having a better-than-average intelligence is a precondition to being a
successful active investor. Buffett has suggested that an IQ of least 125 is
needed. However, Buffett has also said: “If you have more than 120 or 130 IQ
points, you can afford to give the rest away. You don’t need extraordinary
intelligence to succeed as an investor.”4 Of course, an IQ of 125 is above
average, so a certain amount of intelligence is needed. An old joke about Albert
Einstein illustrates the relationship between IQ and investing: Einstein passed
away and went to heaven, where he was informed that his room was not yet
ready. He was told by an angel who was responsible for new arrivals: “I hope
you will not mind staying for a while in a dormitory. I am sorry, but it is the best
we can do right now.”
   The angel escorted Einstein to meet his roommates, saying, “This is your first
roommate. She has an IQ of 180!”
   “That’s wonderful!” exclaimed Einstein. “We can discuss mathematics!”
   The angel then said, “Here is your second roommate. His IQ is 150!”
   “Why, that’s wonderful,” responded Einstein. “We can discuss physics!”

[PDF PAGE 82]
   The angel finally said, “Here is your third roommate. His IQ is 100!”
   “That’s wonderful!” said Einstein. “Where do you think interest rates are
headed?”
   Smart people are not exempt from making mistakes. Unfortunately, all too
often a very high IQ and market-beating investing results are inversely
correlated. In other words, beyond a certain point, greater intelligence can
actually be a problem. The smarter you think you are, the more you may get into
trouble doing things like trying to predict things that are not predictable. Due to
overconfidence, a person with a high IQ can actually make more mistakes that
someone whose IQ is 30 points lower. Thinking that your IQ is a bit lower than
it actually is may actually improve your investing performance.
   The unfortunate truth is that intelligence and experience in one domain do not
necessarily translate to another domain. More importantly, IQ tests do not assess
whether a person is rational. Someone can have a very high IQ and yet not be
very rational. A high-IQ individual may also not have well-developed skills,
such as judgment and decision making. For these reasons, a high-IQ person
outside their circle of competence is often an easy mark for the experienced
promoter or compliance professional. Doctors and lawyers are favorite targets of
scam promoters for this reason. For example, being wise about heart disease or
estate planning does not make you wise about investing. While it is
overconfidence and not high IQ which results in poor investing results, high IQ
may lead to overconfidence. By being careful about things, like staying inside a
circle of competence, high IQ can remain a big positive for an investor, as it is
for Munger.

5. Honest
     How you behave in one place will help in surprising ways later.
                         —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAMN RIGHT, 2000


     Generally speaking, where Berkshire has the power, we try to be more than
     fair to the minority who don’t have the power and who depend on us. You
     can say, “Aren’t they wonderful, moral people?” I’m not sure we get credit
     for a lot of morality because we early knew how advantageous that would
     be to get a reputation for doing the right thing and it’s worked out well for
     us. And my friend Peter Kaufman said, “If the rascals really knew how well
     honor worked, they would come to it.” It really has worked well. People
     make contracts with Berkshire all the time because they trust us to behave

[PDF PAGE 83]
     well where we have the power and they don’t. There’s an old expression on
     this subject, which is really an expression on moral theory: “How nice it is
     to have a tyrant’s strength and how wrong it is to use it like a tyrant.” It’s
     such a simple idea but it’s a correct idea.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2011


     We believe there should be a huge area between everything you should do
     and everything you can do without getting into legal trouble. I don’t think
     you should come anywhere near that line.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


     More often we’ve made extra money out of morality. Ben Franklin was
     right for us. He didn’t say honesty was the best morals, he said that it was
     the best policy.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


     You ought to have an internal compass. So there should be all kinds of
     things you won’t do even though they’re perfectly legal. That’s the way we
     try to operate.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


Character matters greatly in investing and in life. Munger believes honesty is not
only the right thing to do morally, but it is the approach that will produce the
greatest financial return. When people in business together trust each other
because they are honest, the efficiency that results from that trust improves the
financial returns of the business. Munger also says that it is important to stay a
safe distance away from anything illegal, dishonest, or immoral. Walking a
tightrope on the razor’s edge of something like honesty is unwise. On the subject
of teaching honesty, Munger believes that real-life examples are often the best
approach. The personal example that most guides Munger is that of his idol
Benjamin Franklin:

     There’s no reason to look only for living models. … Some of the very best
     models have been dead for a long time.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2000


6. Confident and Nonideological
     Develop correct confidence in your judgment.

[PDF PAGE 84]
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


    I have a black belt in chutzpah. I was born with it.
         —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, SANTA BARBARA, 2003


    The ethos of not fooling yourself is one of the best you could possibly have.
    It’s powerful because it’s so rare.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


Munger proves that it is possible to be confident about your beliefs and skills
and still be very focused on your own potential fallibility. By being aware of
your own limitations, keeping important decisions inside your circle of
competence, and avoiding decisions that are too hard, it is reasonable to feel
more confident in your abilities. Genuine confidence is as valuable as false
confidence is dangerous. There is a huge value in knowing the difference
between these two types of confidence. Finance writer Morgan Housel
absolutely nailed it when he wrote, “There’s a strong correlation between
knowledge and humility.” Humility is at the core of concepts like the circle of
competence and always searching for evidence that disproves what you or others
may assert. You can have a black belt in chutzpah and yet be rubbing your own
nose in your own mistakes. People who are genuinely humble will make fewer
mistakes. Munger has strong views about the dangers of being too ideological.
He has said that heavy ideology can be one of the most dysfunctional extreme
disorders.

    If you get a lot of heavy ideology young and then you start expressing it,
    you are locking your brain into a very unfortunate pattern. And you are
    going to distort your general cognition.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 1998


   The principal problem with ideology is that you stop thinking when it comes
to hard issues. Munger believes in regularly taking your best ideas, tearing them
down, and looking for flaws as a means of improving yourself, which is hard to
do if you are an ideologue.

7. Long-Term Oriented
    Our system will work better in the long term.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2006

[PDF PAGE 85]
     Almost all good businesses engage in “pain today, gain tomorrow”
     activities.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2001


Humans evolved in an environment in which thinking about more than getting
through the day or even to the next meal was not a valuable use of time. People
today, who live in a very different environment, have a hard time with deferred
gratification. James Montier described the problem well here:

     The penultimate hurdle is myopia (or “hyperbolic discounting,” if you
     happen to be a geek). This reflects the idea that consequences, which occur
     at a later date, tend to have much less bearing on our choices the further
     into the future they fall. This can be summed up as, “Eat, drink and be
     merry, for tomorrow we may die.” Of course, this ignores the fact that on
     any given day we are roughly 26,000 times more likely to be wrong than
     right with respect to making it to tomorrow. Or, if you prefer, this myopic
     bias can be summed up by Saint Augustine’s plea: “Lord, make me chaste,
     but not yet.”
                           —JAMES MONTIER, Q FINANCE, 2009


   Munger has recognized that it is hard to think on a long-term basis when you
are just getting started or are starting over. For this reason, he said once that
accumulating “the first $100,000 is a bitch.”5 That is reason enough to work hard
to assemble a basic financial cushion. Not only is it not fun, it is a handicap to
live on the edge of financial ruin.
   In the long term, the power of compounding becomes ever more evident.
Unfortunately, understanding the power of compounding is not a natural state for
the human race; however, it is a critical task.

     Understanding both the power of compound interest and the difficulty of
     getting it is the heart and soul of understanding a lot of things.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK, 2005


   Many things that are not directly financial will compound. Skills,
relationships, and other aspects of life can compound and benefit a person who
invests time and money wisely to cultivate these things.

8. Passionate

[PDF PAGE 86]
     What matters most: passion or competence that was born in? Berkshire is
     full of people who have a peculiar passion for their own business. I would
     argue passion is more important than brain power.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


As for the importance of passion in determining success in investing, business,
or life in general, if you do not know about the link between passion and
success, you have not been paying attention. People who are passionate tend to
work harder and invest more in achieving their goals. Passionate people also
read and think more. Passionate people tend to have an informational edge over
others who are not as passionate. For these reasons and others, if you are playing
a zero-sum game with people who are passionate and you are not, the odds that
you will be a success drop substantially. One trick related to passion is that you
are not likely to be passionate about something you do not understand. Often, the
level of passion you will have for a topic will grow over time. The more you
know about some topics, the more passionate you will get. Only becoming
passionate about things that create that feeling immediately is a big mistake.
Some of the best passions in life grow on you in a nonlinear way after a slow
start.

9. Studious
     Learning from other people’s mistakes is much more pleasant.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2012


     In my whole life, I have known no wise people (over a broad subject matter
     area) who didn’t read all the time—none, zero. You’d be amazed at how
     much Warren reads, at how much I read.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


     Develop into a lifelong self-learner through voracious reading; cultivate
     curiosity and strive to become a little wiser every day.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK, 2005


     You gotta work where you’re turned on.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2013


     The main contribution of [buying See’s Candies] was ignorance removal. If
     it weren’t … good at removing ignorance, we’d be nothing today. We were

[PDF PAGE 87]
     pretty damn stupid when we bought See’s—just a little less stupid enough
     to buy it. The best thing about Berkshire is that we have removed a lot of
     ignorance. The nice thing is we still have a lot more ignorance left. …
     Another trick is scrambling out of your mistakes, which is enormously
     useful. We have a sure-to-fail department store. A trading stamp business
     sure to fold and a textile mill. Out of that comes Berkshire. Think about
     how we would have done if we had a better start.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2014


Munger is a believer in the investment approaches and ideas of Philip Fisher.
Fisher was a successful investor based in California who wrote an influential
book entitled Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits, first published in 1958.
One of these ideas is that the successful investor is usually inherently interested
in business problems. It is precisely for this reason that Ben Graham said that the
best approach to investing is to be businesslike. The idea is that, in order to
understand the stock, you must understand that the business is fundamental to
the Graham value investing system. For this reason, investors like Fisher and
Munger developed a “scuttlebutt” network of people who can help them to learn
more about a business. What they inevitably find is that people involved in an
industry will talk freely about their competitors as long as they believe they will
not be quoted. Buffett uses the same approach:

     I would go out and talk to customers, suppliers, and maybe ex-employees in
     some cases. Everybody. Every time I was interested in an industry, say it
     was coal, I would go around and see every coal company. I would ask every
     CEO, “If you could only buy stock in one company that was not your own,
     which one would it be and why?” You piece those things together, you learn
     about the business after a while.
                    —WARREN BUFFET, UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA, 1998


   Life is a lot more pleasant when you let other people make most of the big
mistakes. After all, you will make enough mistakes all by yourself. Carefully
learning from the mistakes of others is a way to accelerate the learning process.
Nothing vicariously exposes you to more mistakes committed by others than
reading.

10. Collegial
     Even Einstein didn’t work in isolation. But he never went to large

[PDF PAGE 88]
    conferences. Any human being needs conversational colleagues.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2010


    I hardly know anybody who’s done very well in life in terms of cognition
    that doesn’t have somebody trusted to talk to. Einstein would not have been
    able to do what he did without people to talk to. Didn’t need many but he
    needed some. You organize your own thoughts as you try and convince
    other people. It’s a very necessary part of operations. If you had some
    hermit sitting on a mountain, he wouldn’t do very well.
                       —CHARLIE MUNGER, CNBC INTERVIEW, 2014


One great way to avoid mistakes and possibly improve your odds of success is to
have someone you can run your decisions by. Buffett and Munger have the
ability to do that for each other, and that approach has proven to be invaluable.
Buffett calls his partner “The Abominable No-Man” because his answer on a
given investment is so often “no.” While you may not have a single investing
partner like Munger as your colleague, having a diverse group of experienced
people who you trust can be invaluable. Buffett noted in his 2013 shareholder
letter that he took a massive loss because he did not run a major purchase by
Munger. Buffett said the experience was painful enough that hopefully he would
not do that ever again. Buffett also suggested at the same shareholder meeting
that the next Berkshire CEO have a colleague (or colleagues) like Munger.
Finding colleagues who can help you in life is not something that happens
naturally without effort. People seldom volunteer to be colleagues, just as they
do not volunteer to be mentors.

11. Sound Temperament
    Having a certain kind of temperament is more important than brains. You
    need to keep raw irrational emotion under control.
                          —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER, 2005


    Warren and I aren’t prodigies. We can’t play chess blindfolded or be concert
    pianists. But the results are prodigious, because we have a temperamental
    advantage that more than compensates for a lack of IQ points.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, JASON ZWEIG INTERVIEW, 2014


How a person responds emotionally to events and other aspects of life is more
important than intelligence for a Graham value investor. This emotional response

[PDF PAGE 89]
to life’s ups and downs, often referred to by Munger as temperament, will vary
greatly from investor to investor. Investors who otherwise follow the Graham
value investing system will often fail if they do not have a temperament that is
suitable for investing. How suited a person will be in terms of temperament is a
product of a combination of their natural abilities and how much they have
trained themselves to improve on that baseline. Buffett put it this way:
“Independent thinking, emotional stability, and a keen understanding of both
human and institutional behavior are vital to long-term investment success.”6
The best investors are those who have a temperament that is calm and rational.
   Some people simply do not have a temperament that is suitable for investing.
No amount of training will fix that problem. Yes, there are a few people who
seem to be born with a set of qualities that makes them born to use this system,
but even they must work constantly throughout their lives to keep from falling
prey to certain dysfunctional aspects of their temperament. For most everyone
else, only continual hard work and persistence will make them into a sound
Graham value investor. As is the case for many aspects of the human condition,
one person’s strength is often a flip side of what may create a weakness for that
same person. Everyone has aspects of their life that may expose them to
mistakes based on emotions and psychological errors. Seth Karman put it this
way in his book Margin of Safety: “Unsuccessful investors are dominated by
emotion. Rather than responding coolly and rationally to market fluctuations,
they respond emotionally with greed and fear.”7
   Munger believes that a given investor’s degree of success will be determined
by how well he or she controls the dysfunctional urges that can overcome other
investors. As has been noted previously, it is not possible for everyone to
outperform the market. For better or worse, mistakes by other investors are the
source of a Graham value investor’s opportunity. One very important new
approach to the Graham value investing system involves using computers and
software to take human emotions completely out of the process. These machine-
learning systems identify patterns consistent with Graham’s value investing
principles shared by companies that outperform the market. Because the process
happens automatically via computer algorithms, human emotions can be
removed from the stock selection process. While machine learning is not used by
Buffett or Munger, it is completely consistent with their principles. Software is
revolutionizing every industry, and it would be a mistake to assume that this will
not be the case with investing.
   Arguably the best way to sort out whether you have the right temperament for
the Graham value investing system is to keep a careful written record of your
investment decisions. This record-keeping will help you avoid falling prey to

[PDF PAGE 90]
psychological denial. If you review your record of investing performance, you
might realize that you are better off as an index investor. If you are not capable
of keeping your head when all of the people around you (including Mr. Market)
are losing theirs, you may not have the right temperament for the Graham value
investing system. Reaching the conclusion that you are not cut out to be a
Graham value investor is not a tragedy. In contrast, trying to be an active
investor when you have the wrong temperament is almost certain to be a tragedy.

12. Frugal
     We don’t have an isolated group [managers] surrounded by servants.
     Berkshire’s headquarters is a tiny little suite.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


     If you take the money invested in common stocks, and then subtract the 2
     percent per year that goes out in investment management costs and
     fractional trading costs, that’s more than companies pay in dividends. …
     This would fit very well into Alice in Wonderland; pay dividends of X and
     pay the same amount to investment managers and advisors.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


     Mozart … overspent his income his entire life—that will make you
     miserable.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2007


Like his idol Benjamin Franklin and his partner Buffett, Munger is relatively
frugal given his wealth, especially when it comes to operating and investment
expenses. In addition to the axiom “a penny saved is two pence dear,”8 Benjamin
Franklin wrote: “The way to wealth is as plain as the way to market. It depends
chiefly on two words, industry and frugality: that is, waste neither time nor
money, but make the best use of both. Without industry and frugality nothing
will do, and with them, everything.”9 Other Graham value investors have a
similar focus on frugality. Walter Schloss was famous for running his investment
firm out of a single room leased from another investment firm. I suspect that
some of the frugality that can be seen in Graham value investors springs from
their understanding of opportunity cost and the power of compounding. They
naturally compare the value of consumption today with the value of greater
consumptions tomorrow, which causes them to be frugal.

[PDF PAGE 91]
13. Risk Averse
     Using [a stock’s] volatility as a measure of risk is nuts. Risk to us is 1) the
     risk of permanent loss of capital, or 2) the risk of inadequate return. Some
     great businesses have very volatile returns—for example, See’s Candies
     usually loses money in two quarters of each year—and some terrible
     businesses can have steady results.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 1997


     This is an amazingly sound place. We are more disaster-resistant than most
     other places. We haven’t pushed it as hard as other people would have
     pushed it. I don’t want to go back to Go [like in a game of Monopoly]. I’ve
     been to Go. … A lot of our shareholders have a majority of their net worth
     in Berkshire, and they don’t want to go back to Go either.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2001


     You can easily see how risk-averse Berkshire is. In the first place, we try
     and behave in such a way that no rational person is going to worry about
     our credit. And after we have done that, we also behave in such a way that
     if the world suddenly didn’t like our credit, we wouldn’t even notice it for
     months, because we have so much liquidity. That double layering of
     protection against risk is as natural as breathing around Berkshire. It’s just
     part of the culture.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2008


As the quotes above make clear, Munger strongly believes risk cannot be fully
measured by the volatility of investment prices in markets, as some people
claim. Volatility is certainly one type of risk. For example, if you are retiring or
have tuition bills to pay at a certain time, volatility is one type of risk you must
face, but it is not the only risk. Why do investment managers try to equate risk
with volatility rather than just considering it as one important type of risk? There
are many money managers who want you to believe that volatility is equal to
risk because volatility is a major risk for them because, if stocks drop in price,
investors will flee from their services. These money managers also love equating
risk with volatility because it gives investors the impression that risk can be
precisely quantified, which helps justify their fees. Risk cannot be fully
expressed as a number. Why do academics also try to equate risk with volatility?
Munger believes this happens because (1) it helps make their mathematics
beautiful, even though it has little tie to reality, and (2) it can lead to attractive

[PDF PAGE 92]
consulting contracts with money management firms. People like Nassim Taleb
have written books that chronicle how flawed risk management has resulted in
crisis after crisis. One story sometimes told by investors goes like this: A
surgeon, an accountant, and a risk manager at a bank are debating whose
profession goes back the furthest. The surgeon says, “God made Eve out of
Adam’s rib. Obviously surgery came first.”
   The accountant disagreed and said, “Before that, God created the universe by
bringing order out of chaos. That’s accounting.”
   The risk manager then chimed in. “I’ve got you both beat,” she says. “Answer
me this. Who created the chaos?”
   For the best essay on the proper definition of risk, it’s a good idea to read
Buffett’s 1993 Berkshire shareholder’s letter. Buffett pointed out that risk comes
from not knowing what you’re doing. Risk is something an investor should retire
rather than “dial up.” Buffett illustrated the best way to deal with risk with a
story:

     Every two years I’m part of an informal group that gathers to have fun and
     explore a few subjects. Last September, meeting at Bishop’s Lodge in Santa
     Fe, we asked [Ike Friedman, Borsheim’s managing Genius] to come by and
     educate us on jewels and the jewelry business. Ike decided to dazzle the
     group, so he brought from Omaha about $20 million of particularly fancy
     merchandise. I was somewhat apprehensive—Bishop’s Lodge is no Fort
     Knox—and I mentioned my concern to Ike at our opening party the evening
     before his presentation. Ike took me aside. “See that safe?” he said. “This
     afternoon we changed the combination and now even the hotel management
     doesn’t know what it is.” I breathed easier. Ike went on: “See those two big
     fellows with guns on their hips? They’ll be guarding the safe all night.” I
     now was ready to rejoin the party. But Ike leaned closer: “And besides,
     Warren,” he confided, “the jewels aren’t in the safe.”
             —WARREN BUFFETT, 1989 BERKSHIRE SHAREHOLDER LETTER, 1990

[PDF PAGE 93]
                                        6
THE SEVEN VARIABLES IN THE GRAHAM VALUE
            INVESTING SYSTEM


NOW THAT THE fundamental principles of the Graham value investing system have
been discussed, it is time to discuss how investors can differ in their styles and
still remain Graham value investors. You will recall that in this book’s
Principles, Right Stuff, and Variables framework, aspects of a Graham value
investor’s style that differ are called variables.


 First Variable: Determining the Appropriate Intrinsic Value of a Business

The definition of intrinsic value in the Owner’s Manual of Berkshire Hathaway
is as follows:

     Intrinsic value can be defined simply: It’s the discounted value of the cash
     that can be taken out of a business during its remaining life. The calculation
     of intrinsic value, though, is not so simple. As our definition suggests,
     intrinsic value is an estimate rather than a precise figure, and it’s
     additionally an estimate that must be changed if interest rates move or
     forecasts of future cash flows are revised.
            —WARREN BUFFETT, BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY OWNER’S MANUAL, 2014


   Because the cash that can flow from a business is not an annuity and instead is
based on a number of fundamental factors that are impossible to predict with
certainty, determining the value of a business is an art and not a science. Almost
every investor will have a slightly different way of determining the intrinsic
value of a business, and there is nothing inherently wrong with that fact. For this
reason, it is best to think about intrinsic value as falling within a range rather
than an exact figure.
   Some businesses have an intrinsic value that is relatively easy to calculate,
whereas other businesses have an intrinsic value that value investors have little
idea how to calculate. Munger does not even try to value businesses in every

[PDF PAGE 94]
possible case:

     We have no system for estimating the correct value of all businesses. We
     put almost all in the “too hard” pile and sift through a few easy ones.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2007


   In an ideal situation, the process of determining the intrinsic valuation of a
business is easy enough that Munger can do that valuation in his head. While
people of more ordinary intelligence may need to use a calculator to do the same
mathematics, Munger’s point about a desire for simplicity and an obvious result
remains true for any Graham value investor. If Munger determines that the
valuation of the business is too hard, he simply says, “I pass.” This is such a
powerful and underutilized idea. To use a baseball analogy, Munger and Buffett
love the fact that they are not required to swing the bat as an investor in response
to every pitch.
   The tendency of many people who are overconfident is just the reverse of
Munger’s use of a “too hard” pile. In other words, people with a high IQ often
relish the opportunity to solve hard valuation problems, thinking that they will
be rewarded for having such ample mental skill with a higher return. The reality
is that, in trying to solve hard problems, emotional and psychological problems
cause the losses rather than a lack of intelligence. Hard problems are hard
problems, pregnant with opportunities to make mistakes.
   Determining the value of a business is best done and is most reliable when the
process is simple. Even in a case where the process is relatively simple, a
Graham value investor must remember that the valuation process is inherently
imprecise. An imprecise value is perfectly acceptable to a value investor because
the Graham value investor is looking for a margin of safety that is so substantial
that precise calculation is unnecessary. A good analogy is a waiter trying to
decide whether a customer is above the legal drinking age. There are certain
restaurant patrons who are obviously older than the legal drinking age, just as
there are certain businesses with an intrinsic value that obviously provides the
necessary margin of safety.
   Buffett and Munger admit they do not have exactly the same definition of
intrinsic value. Buffett believes:

     Intrinsic value is terribly important but very fuzzy. Two people looking at
     the same set of facts, moreover—and this would apply even to Charlie and
     me—will almost inevitably come up with at least slightly different intrinsic
     value figures.

[PDF PAGE 95]
                 —WARREN BUFFETT, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


  The definition is fuzzy enough that really smart and experienced investors can
do the math in their head.

     Warren talks about these discounted cash flows. I’ve never seen him do
     one.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, WARREN BUFFET SPEAKS, 2007


   In his 1994 Berkshire chairman’s letter, Buffett wrote that “intrinsic value [is]
a number that is impossible to pinpoint but essential to estimate. … Despite its
fuzziness, however, intrinsic value is all-important and is the only logical way to
evaluate the relative attractiveness of investments and businesses.”1 While the
views and approaches to valuation may vary in some detail, they are generally
consistent. Valuation is not a process in which a Graham value investor makes
stuff up as he or she goes along. In the view of Michael Price: “Intrinsic value is
what a businessman would pay for total control of the business with full due
diligence and a big bank line. The biggest indicator to me is where the fully
controlled position trades, not where the market trades it or where the stock
trades relative to comparable [businesses].”2
   There are some businesses with certain qualities that Munger will not touch
with a ten-foot pole:

     There are two kinds of businesses: The first earns 12 percent, and you can
     take it out at the end of the year. The second earns 12 percent, but all the
     excess cash must be reinvested—there’s never any cash. It reminds me of
     the guy who looks at all of his equipment and says, “There’s all of my
     profit.” We hate that kind of business.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


   When Munger and Buffett value a business, they use what they call owner’s
earnings as the starting point. Owner’s earnings can be defined as: Net income +
Depreciation + Depletion + Amortization – Capital expenditure – Additional
working capital. Berkshire uses the owner’s earnings figure in this process to
take into account capital expenditures that will be necessary to maintain the
business’s return on equity. A more complete explanation of an owner’s earnings
calculation is provided in the section of this book called Berkshire Math.
   Owner’s earnings is not a typical valuation metric. Other Graham value
investors may use different metrics, like earnings before interest and taxes

[PDF PAGE 96]
(EBIT), in calculating value. For example, in The Little Book that Beats the
Market, Greenblatt says that he views the depreciation part of EBIT as a proxy
for capital expenditures and seems to imply that replacing depreciation with
capital expenditure would be a better approach.
   Buffett has views on the importance of growth in determining the value of a
business, which echo Munger’s approach:

     Growth is always a component in the calculation of value, constituting a
     variable whose importance can range from negligible to enormous and
     whose impact can be negative as well as positive. … Growth benefits
     investors only when the business in point can invest at incremental returns
     that are enticing – in other words, only when each dollar used to finance the
     growth creates over a dollar of long-term market value. In the case of a
     low-return business requiring incremental funds, growth hurts the investor.
             —WARREN BUFFETT, 1992 BERKSHIRE SHAREHOLDER LETTER, 1993


  It is more important that the definition of intrinsic value stay consistent in the
mind of a given investor than that the calculation be the same as every other
Graham value investor. As will be explained, intrinsic value is a reference point
in the final analysis for investors as they patiently watch the price of an
investment gyrate up and down in price over time. In doing a valuation analysis,
Graham value investors like Munger are very conservative.


      Second Variable: Determining the Appropriate Margin of Safety

Margin of safety is a simple idea that is applied in different ways by different
investors. Some investors like to have a margin of safety that is much larger than
others. For example, one Graham value investor may require a 25 percent
margin of safety, whereas another needs 40 percent. Of course, because the
concept of intrinsic value itself is imprecise, the calculation of margin of safety
is necessarily imprecise. Making things easier is the fact that Munger and Buffett
like the amount of a margin of safety to be so big that they need not do any math
other than in their heads. Of course, Buffett and Munger can do more
mathematics in their heads than an average person can do on a calculator, but the
point remains. Munger wants the math involved in evaluating an investment to
be simple, overpoweringly clear, and positive. Bill Gates has commented on this
point:

[PDF PAGE 97]
    Being good with numbers doesn’t necessarily correlate with being a good
    investor. Warren doesn’t outperform other investors because he computes
    odds better. That’s not it at all. Warren never makes an investment where
    the difference between doing it and not doing it relies on the second digit of
    computation. He doesn’t invest—take a swing of the bat—unless the
    opportunity appears unbelievably good.
                             —BILL GATES, FORTUNE, 1996


   Many people make the mistake of assuming that buying a quality company
ensures safety. A given company may be a quality company with an attractive
business, but that alone is not enough because the price you pay for a share of
stock matters. A company like Facebook, Nike, or even Berkshire may be an
important company with lots of revenue and profit, but its business is not worth
an infinite price. Howard Marks put it best:

    Most investors think quality, as opposed to price, is the determinant of
    whether something’s risky. But high quality assets can be risky, and low
    quality assets can be safe. It’s just a matter of the price paid for them. …
    Elevated popular opinion, then, isn’t just the source of low return potential,
    but also of high risk.
                  —HOWARD MARKS, THE MOST IMPORTANT THING, 2011


   Similarly, just because the price of a share of stock in a company is beaten
down from formerly high levels does not make it safe to buy. In other words,
that a given company is way off its value of a few years ago does not necessarily
make the purchase of the stock safe in terms of a margin of safety.
   Munger talked once about the concept of margin of safety in describing
Buffett’s mentor Benjamin Graham in this way:

    Graham had this concept of value to a private owner—what the whole
    enterprise would sell for if it were available. And that was calculable in
    many cases. Then, if you could take the stock price and multiply it by the
    number of shares and get something that was one third or less of sellout
    value, he would say that you’ve got a lot of edge going for you. Even with
    an elderly alcoholic running a stodgy business, this significant excess of
    real value per share working for you means that all kinds of good things can
    happen to you. You had a huge margin of safety—as he put it—by having
    this big excess value going for you.
       —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA (USC) BUSINESS
                                 SCHOOL, 1994

[PDF PAGE 98]
  While the calculations of the intrinsic value and margin of safety are
imprecise and fuzzy, they remain critical tasks in the Graham value investing
system. As James Montier wrote:

    Valuation is the closest thing to the law of gravity that we have in finance.
    It’s the primary determinant of long-term returns. However, the objective of
    investment (in general) is not to buy at fair value, but to purchase with a
    margin of safety. This reflects that any estimate of fair value is just that: an
    estimate, not a precise figure, so the margin of safety provides a much-
    needed cushion against errors and misfortunes. When investors violate [this
    principle] by investing with no margin of safety, they risk the prospect of
    the permanent impairment of capital.
            —JAMES MONTIER, THE SEVEN IMMUTABLE LAWS OF INVESTING, 2011



    The golden rule of investing: no asset (or strategy) is so good that you
    should invest irrespective of the price paid.
                    —JAMES MONTIER, GMO LETTER, DECEMBER 2013



     Third Variable: Determining the Scope of an Investor’s Circle of
                             Competence

    We have to deal with things that we’re capable of understanding.
                       —CHARLIE MUNGER, BBC INTERVIEW, 2009


    We’d rather deal with what we understand. Why should we want to play a
    competitive game in a field where we have no advantages—maybe a
    disadvantage—instead of playing in a field where we have a clear
    advantage? Each of you will have to figure out where your talent lies. And
    you’ll have to use your advantages. But if you try to succeed in what you’re
    worst at, you’re going to have a very lousy career. I can almost guarantee it.
    To do otherwise, you’d have to buy a winning lottery ticket or get very
    lucky somewhere else.
             —CHARLIE MUNGER, STANFORD UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL, 1998


    I don’t think it’s difficult to figure out competence. If you’re 5’2”, say no to
    professional basketball. Ninety-two years old, you’re not going to be the
    romantic lead in Hollywood. At 350 pounds, you don’t dance the lead in the

[PDF PAGE 99]
    Bolshoi ballet … Competency is a relative concept.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2014


    I’m really better at determining my level of incompetency and then just
    avoiding that. And I prefer to think that question through in reverse. We
    have a good batting average and that is probably because we are a little
    more competent than we think we are.
                       —CHARLIE MUNGER, CNBC INTERVIEW, 2014


Understanding the limits of your own competence is very valuable. Venture
capitalist Fred Wilson put it simply: “The only way you win is by knowing what
you’re good at and what you’re not good at, and sticking to what you’re good
at.”3 Munger similarly believes that investors who get outside of what he calls
their circle of competence can easily find themselves in big trouble. Within his
or her circle of competence, an investor has expertise and knowledge that gives
them a significant advantage over the market in evaluating an investment.
   The idea behind the circle of competence is so simple that it is arguably
embarrassing to say it out loud: when you do not know what you’re doing, it is
riskier than when you do know what you’re doing. What could be simpler? And
yet, humans often do not act in accordance with this idea. For example, the
otherwise smart doctor or dentist is easy prey for the promoter selling limited
partnerships or securities in a company that makes technology for the petroleum
industry.
   Munger has pointed out that even one of the world’s greatest investors stepped
outside of his circle of competence during the Internet bubble:

    Soros couldn’t bear to see others make money in the technology sector
    without him, and he got killed.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2000


 The circle of competence approach is a form of opportunity cost analysis, says
Munger:

    Warren and I only look at industries and companies which we have a core
    competency in. Every person has to do the same thing. You have a limited
    amount of time and talent and you have to allocate it smartly.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2011


  The value of specialization is, of course, at work here too. Munger put it this

[PDF PAGE 100]
way:

       Warren and I have skills that could easily be taught to other people. One
       skill is knowing the edge of your own competency. It’s not a competency if
       you don’t know the edge of it. And Warren and I are better at tuning out the
       standard stupidities. We’ve left a lot of more talented and diligent people in
       the dust, just by working hard at eliminating standard error.
                         —CHARLIE MUNGER, STANFORD LAWYER, 2009


   Munger has a range of approaches he uses to avoid mistakes. To make this
point by analogy, Munger is fond of saying that he wants to know where he will
die so he can intentionally never go there. His friend and investor Li Lu
described one such approach:

       When Charlie thinks about things, he starts by inverting. To understand how
       to be happy in life Charlie will study how to make life miserable; to
       examine how a business becomes big and strong, Charlie first studies how
       businesses decline and die; most people care more about how to succeed in
       the stock market, Charlie is most concerned about why most have failed in
       the stock market.
                        —LI LU, CHINA ENTREPRENEUR MAGAZINE, 2010


   By adopting this approach Munger is trying hard to limit his investing to areas
in which he has a significant advantage in terms of competence and not just a
basic understanding. To illustrate this point, he has in the past talked about a man
who had “managed to corner the market in shoe buttons—a really small market,
but he had it all.”4 It is possible to earn an attractive financial return in a very
limited domain like shoe buttons, although that is an extreme example of a very
narrow circle of competence. The areas in which you might have a circle of
competence will hopefully be significantly larger than just shoe buttons.
However, if you try to expand that circle of competence too far, it can have
disastrous results. Li Lu has written about how Munger has described this point
to him:

       The true insights a person can get in life are still very limited, so correct
       decision making must necessarily be confined to your “circle of
       competence.” A “competence” that has no defined borders cannot be called
       a true competence.
                        —LI LU, CHINA ENTREPRENEUR MAGAZINE, 2010

[PDF PAGE 101]
   Once the borders of a circle of competence are established, the challenge is to
remain inside those borders. Staying within a circle of competence is obviously
not rocket science in theory, but it is hard for most people to do in practice.
Lapses by investors are more likely to occur when they meet a slick promoter
who is highly skilled at telling stories. This is a case where emotional
intelligence, which is very different than intellectual intelligence, becomes
critically important. Humans love stories because they cause them to suspend
disbelief. Some of the biggest frauds in financial history, like Bernie Madoff and
Ken Lay, were excellent storytellers. Stories cause people to suspend disbelief,
and being in that state is harmful to any person’s investing process.
   Too many investors confuse familiarity with competence. For example, just
because a person flies on airlines a lot does not mean that he or she understands
the airline industry well enough to be competent as an investor in that sector of
the economy. Using Facebook a lot does not make you qualified to invest in a
social media startup. If you have not gone beyond simply using a product or
service and have not taken a deep dive into the business of a company, you
should not invest in that company.
   Among the people who know how to stay within their circle of competence
are the chief executive officers of Berkshire subsidiaries. For example, Buffett
once pointed to Rose Blumkin of Furniture Mart as a person who fully
understands the dimensions of her capabilities:

     [If] you got about two inches outside the perimeter of her circle of
     competence, she didn’t even talk about it. She knew exactly what she was
     good at, and she had no desire to kid herself about those things.
                        —WARREN BUFFETT, THE SNOWBALL, 2008


  Knowing the boundaries of your circle of competence is critically important.
He feels that the answer should be obvious:

     If you have competence, you pretty much know its boundaries already. To
     ask the question [of whether you’re past the boundary] is to answer it.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


   Buffett talks about that fact that knowing where the perimeter of your circle of
competence may be is far more important than the size of your circle. If you are
only competent in spots and stay in those spots, you can do just fine. Munger has
said on this point:

[PDF PAGE 102]
     There are a lot of things we pass on. All of you have to look for a special
     area of competency and focus on that.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


   It is critical that an investor remain focused on avoiding mistakes. If someone
tries to sell you something that requires decisions that are too hard, you have the
option to just say no. Why would you do what is hard when you can find
investments that involve easy decisions? In using a circle of competence filter,
Munger is trying to invest only when he has an unfair advantage. Otherwise, he
wants to do nothing (which most people find very hard to do).

     The reason we are not in high-tech businesses is that we have a special lack
     of aptitude in that area. And, yes—low-tech business can be plenty hard.
     Just try to open a restaurant and make it succeed. … Why should it be easy
     to get rich? In a competitive world, shouldn’t an easy way to get rich be
     impossible.
                       —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO MEETING, 1998


   In a sector of the economy like technology, Munger and Buffett have both said
they do not understand the businesses well enough to be technology investors.
They don’t feel like they can forecast what owners’ earnings from a technology-
driven business will be like even in five years, let alone for decades. Because
every business uses technology, Munger and Buffett are not excluding them
from their circle of competence.
   Munger’s reluctance to invest in the technology sector can be traced to
mistakes that he made early in his life because he stepped outside of his circle of
competence. Munger received his first taste of the technology business when he
bought into a company that made instruments early in his investing career. His
experience in that case was not good. His top scientist was hired away by a
venture capitalist; then magnetic tape came along, which made the performance
of the business even worse. Munger said once that the entire experience nearly
made him, in his words, “go broke.”

     Warren and I don’t feel like we have any great advantage in the high-tech
     sector. In fact, we feel like we’re at a big disadvantage in trying to
     understand the nature of technical developments in software, computer
     chips or what have you. So we tend to avoid that stuff, based on our
     personal inadequacies. Again, that is a very, very powerful idea. Every
     person is going to have a circle of competence. And it’s going to be very

[PDF PAGE 103]
    hard to advance that circle. If I had to make my living as a musician—I
    can’t even think of a level low enough to describe where I would be sorted
    out to if music were the measuring standard of the civilization.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   Munger’s personal decision regarding investing in technology companies does
not mean that the technology sector is not right for other people who have a
circle of competence that includes technology.
   Technology presents additional challenges because uncertainty is high and the
speed of innovation vastly faster. Buffett has said: “Predicting the long-term
economics of companies that operate in fast-changing industries is simply far
beyond our perimeter.”5 An investor can cope with that difference by being
careful about his or her circle of competence within technology. To know a lot
about graphics chips is not necessarily to know much about wireless data, for
example. To think otherwise is to tempt fate. As Clint Eastwood asked in the
movie Dirty Harry: “You’ve got to ask yourself one question: ‘Do I feel lucky?’
Well, do ya?”


     Fourth Variable: Determining How Much of Each Security to Buy

    Our investment style has been given a name—focus investing—which
    implies 10 holdings, not 100 or 400. Focus investing is growing somewhat,
    but what’s really growing is the unlimited use of consultants to advise on
    asset allocation, to analyze other consultants, etc.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2010


In addition to complaining about consultants and their fees, Munger is saying
that diversification is not an approach that is attractive to him. Some Graham
value investors diversify, while others like Munger concentrate their investment
portfolio. A person can adopt either concentrated or diversified portfolio
strategies and still be a Graham value investor. Once he made the decision to
become an active investor, Munger became a devotee of concentrating his
investments. Typical of Munger’s views on these issues is the following:

    [With] closet indexing … you’re paying a manager a fortune and he has 85
    percent of his assets invested parallel to the indexes. If you have such a
    system, you’re being played for a sucker.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2005

[PDF PAGE 104]
Munger developed this philosophy in no small part by learning from the example
of Phil Fisher. When it comes to diversification versus concentration, Munger
believes that focus is the better answer for him:

     I always like it when someone attractive to me agrees with me, so I have
     fond memories of Phil Fisher. The idea that it was hard to find good
     investments, to concentrate in a few, seems to me to be an obviously good
     idea. But 98 percent of the investment world doesn’t think this way.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


   Each investor who chooses focus investing over diversification has a slightly
different reason for doing so, but there is commonality on some points. Seth
Klarman pointed out that it is better to know a lot about ten or fifteen companies
than to know just a little about many. The number of stocks a person can
realistically follow and understand the economics of the specific business better
than the market is significantly less than twenty. For example, the idea that a
dentist working full time in his or her profession is going to pick technology
stocks better than the market, especially after fees and expenses, is unlikely.
Remember the task is not just to pick a quality company, but to find a mispriced
bet.
   There are other Graham value investors who disagree with Munger and
instead believe in diversification. Two notable examples were Ben Graham
himself and Walter Schloss. Jason Zweig has pointed out that, “Even the great
investment analyst Benjamin Graham urged ‘adequate though not excessive
diversification,’ which he defined as between 10 and about 30 securities.”6 After
a significant number of years had passed after the Great Depression, it was no
longer possible to be widely diversified and only invest in public stocks. Some
investors who seek greater diversification than Munger invest in less liquid and
less frequently traded markets, like distressed debt. Of course, these less liquid
and traded markets are also places where asset mispricing is more likely to
occur, and rational Graham value investors can find bargains. Buffett believes
that diversification is protection against not knowing what you’re doing—and
when it comes to investing, nearly no one knows what they are doing. The most
diversified approach is to buy a portfolio of low-fee index funds and exchange-
traded funds.
   Munger considers one of the saddest cases in investing to be when someone
thinks they are an active investor, but in reality they have invested in so many
stocks that they have become “closet indexers.” Investors who adopt the
Berkshire system are focus investors. Munger noted:

[PDF PAGE 105]
    The Berkshire-style investors tend to be less diversified than other people.
    The academics have done a terrible disservice to intelligent investors by
    glorifying the idea of diversification. Because I just think the whole concept
    is literally almost insane. It emphasizes feeling good about not having your
    investment results depart very much from average investment results. But
    why would you get on the bandwagon like that if somebody didn’t make
    you with a whip and a gun?
                         —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER, 2005



            Fifth Variable: Determining When to Sell a Security

    Selling [something] when it approaches your calculation of its intrinsic
    value [is] hard. But if you buy a few great companies, then you can sit on
    your ass. That’s a good thing.
                —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2000


    We tend not to sell operating businesses. That is a lifestyle choice. We have
    bought well. We have a few which would be better if we sold them. But net
    we do better if we don’t do gin rummy management, churning our portfolio.
    We want a reputation as not being churners and flippers. Competitive
    advantage is being not a churner.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2008


    To us, investing is the equivalent of going out and betting against the pari-
    mutuel system. We look for a horse with one chance in two of winning, and
    that pays three to one. In other words, we’re looking for a mispriced
    gamble. That’s what investing is, and you have to know enough to know
    whether the gamble is mispriced.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


    There are huge advantages for an individual to get into a position where
    you make a few great investments and just sit back and wait: you’re paying
    less to brokers. You’re listening to less nonsense. And if it works, the
    governmental tax system gives you an extra 1, 2 or 3 percentage points per
    annum compounded.
                         —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAMN RIGHT, 2000


Munger is pointing out in the above quotes that Graham value investors have
adopted a range of approaches to the question of when or whether to sell a given

[PDF PAGE 106]
investment. Munger prefers to buy a business or a portion of a business and own
it essentially forever. His preference is in no small part driven by the ability of a
long-term holder of an asset to gain certain tax and other advantages. By not
incurring these tax costs, transaction costs, and other fees, the compounding
benefits for the investor are substantially higher. Unlike Munger, some other
Graham value investors choose to sell assets when they reach something
approaching their intrinsic value. There is no right answer on whether or when to
sell an asset, and how a particular investor answers this question is partially a
matter of temperament. However, most Graham value investors seem to prefer
Munger’s approach.


Sixth Variable: Determining How Much to Bet When You Find a Mispriced
                                Asset

     It’s not given to human beings to have such talent that they can just know
     everything about everything all the time. But it’s given to human beings
     who work hard at it—who look and sift the world for a mispriced bet—that
     they can occasionally find one.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


     We came to this notion of finding a mispriced bet and loading up when we
     were very confident that we were right.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


     The wise ones bet heavily when the world offers them that opportunity.
     They bet big when they have the odds. And the rest of the time, they don’t.
     It’s just that simple.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


     Playing poker in the Army and as a young lawyer honed my business skills.
     … What you have to learn is to fold early when the odds are against you, or
     if you have a big edge, back it heavily because you don’t get a big edge
     often.
                          —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAMN RIGHT, 2000


     The model I like—to sort of simplify the notion of what goes on in a market
     for common stocks—is the pari-mutuel system at the racetrack. …
     Everybody goes there and bets and the odds change based on what’s bet.
     That’s what happens in the stock market. Any damn fool can see that a

[PDF PAGE 107]
     horse carrying a light weight with a wonderful win rate and a good post
     position etc., etc., is way more likely to win than a horse with a terrible
     record and extra weight and so on and so on. But if you look at the odds,
     the bad horse pays 100 to 1, whereas the good horse pays 3 to 2. Then it’s
     not clear which is statistically the best bet, using the mathematics of Fermat
     and Pascal.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   By investing only within his circle of competence, Munger is trying to invest
only when he has an unfair advantage. When he has an unfair advantage, which
is not that often, he bets big. This means he will be less active than other
investors. Munger believes that buying and selling a stock for its own sake (e.g.,
to stay busy) is a very bad idea. Munger’s bias against what he calls investment
hyperactivity is quite strong. When in doubt, his suggestion is that you do
nothing.

     Around here, I would say that if our predictions have been a little better
     than other people’s, it’s because we’ve tried to make fewer of them.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 1998


     We try and predict what individual investments will swim well in relation to
     the tide. And then we tend to accept the effects of the tide as those effects
     fall.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2001


  Munger does not like situations where there is a close investment decision to
make. He would certainly not invest in anything with a big downside and a small
upside. One of the best ways I have ever heard the idea behind his philosophy
expressed was by the famed investor Sam Zell:

     Listen, business is easy. If you’ve got a low downside and a big upside, you
     go do it. If you’ve got a big downside and a small upside, you run away.
     The only time you have any work to do is when you have a big downside
     and a big upside.
                             —SAM ZELL, NEW YORKER, 2007


  In terms of finance theory, what a smart investor is looking for is optionality.
Nassim Taleb described what the smart investor is looking for in this way:
“Payoffs [that] follow a power law type of statistical distribution, with big, near

[PDF PAGE 108]
unlimited upside but because of optionality, limited downside.”7 There is a joke
that illustrates the value of optionality: An investment banker and carpenter are
sitting next to each other on a long flight. The investment banker asks the
carpenter if she would like to play a fun game. The carpenter is tired and just
wants to have a nap, so she politely declines and tries to sleep. The investment
banker loudly insists that the game is a lot of fun and says, “I will ask you a
question, and if you don’t know the answer you must pay me only $5. Then you
ask me one question, and if I don’t know the answer, I will pay you $500.” To
keep him quiet, she agrees to play the game.
   The investment banker asks the first question: “What’s the distance from the
earth to the Saturn?” The carpenter doesn’t say a word, pulls out $5, and hands it
to the investment banker.
   The carpenter then asks the investment banker, “What goes up a hill with three
legs and comes down with four?” She then closes her eyes again to rest.
   The investment banker immediately opens his laptop computer, connects to
the in-flight Wi-Fi, and searches the Internet for an answer without success. He
then sends emails to all of his smart friends, who also have no answer. After two
hours of searching, he finally gives up. The investment banker wakes up the
carpenter and hands her $500. The carpenter takes the $500 and goes back to
sleep. The investment banker is going crazy from not knowing the answer. So he
wakes her up and asks, “What does go up a hill with three legs and comes down
with four?”
   The carpenter hands the investment banker $5 and goes back to sleep.


 Seventh Variable: Determining Whether the Quality of a Business Should
                             Be Considered

     Ben Graham had blind spots. He had too low an appreciation of the fact that
     some businesses were worth paying big premiums for.
                         —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAMN RIGHT, 2000


Munger’s approach to valuing a business is influenced in part by Ben Graham
and in part by Phil Fisher. The importance of Phil Fisher to the evolution of
Munger’s thinking on the Graham value investing system is fundamental. For
Fisher, wide diversification is essentially a form of closet indexing. He instead
believed that an investor should focus on a relatively small number of stocks if
he or she expects to outperform a market. Fisher preferred a holding period of
almost forever; for example, he bought Motorola in 1955 and held it until 2004.

[PDF PAGE 109]
Fisher also believed that a fat pitch investment opportunity is delivered rarely
and only to those investors who are willing to patiently work to find them. Fisher
felt that business cycles and changes in Mr. Market’s attitude are inevitable.
Unlike many other investors, Fisher assigned significant weight to the quality of
the underlying business. For this reason, Fisher was able to outperform markets
as an investor, even though he did not look for cigar-butt stocks.
   An approach that incorporates the ideas of Fisher is very different from the
approach of a Graham value investor like Seth Klarman. Both Munger and Seth
Klarman want a margin of safety, which is a Graham value investing principle,
but each investor chooses to calculate both intrinsic value and margin of safety
in different ways. For Munger, the approach used by Fisher was clearly superior:

     If I’d never lived, Warren would have morphed into liking the better
     businesses better and being less interested in deep-value cigar butts. The
     supply of cigar butts was running out. … The natural drift was going that
     way without Charlie Munger. But he’d been brainwashed a little by
     worshiping Ben Graham and making so much money following traditional
     Graham methods that I may have pushed him along a little faster in the
     direction that he was already going.
                          —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER, 2005


     The trouble with what I call the classic Ben Graham concept is that
     gradually the world wised up [after enough time had passed after the Great
     Depression] and those real obvious bargains disappeared. … Ben Graham
     followers responded by changing the calibration on their Geiger counters.
     In effect, they started defining a bargain in a different way. And it still
     worked pretty well. So the Ben Graham intellectual system was a very good
     one.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   Buffett today is arguably more like Fisher than the 15 percent he once
specified, but only he knows how much of my assertion is true. It was the
influence of Munger that moved Buffett a considerable distance away from a
pure Ben Graham approach. Their investment in See’s Candies was an early
example in which Berkshire paid more for a quality company. What Munger and
Buffett found was that See’s Candies had untapped pricing power which was
able to increase its financial return in a very significant way. The two investors
found after they bought See’s Candies, they could regularly raise prices and
customers did not seem to care. Munger calls this ability to raise prices and not

[PDF PAGE 110]
cause a significant drop in sales “pricing power.” Buffett said once, “More than
50 years ago, Charlie told me that it was far better to buy a wonderful business at
a fair price than to buy a fair business at a wonderful price.”8 What Charlie is
talking about here is the idea that a business with superior quality bought at the
right price can still be a bargain purchase consistent with the principles of the
Graham value investing system.
   Part of the reason this shift to Fisher’s approach to valuing a business
happened is that the sorts of companies that Graham liked to buy started to
disappear the further away the time period was from the Great Depression. The
other push toward Fisher’s ideas came because of the success Munger and
Buffett were having in markets. Because of their consistent and persistent
financial success, Berkshire must put massive amounts of cash to work every
year, and finding enough cigar-butt investments at that scale is an impossible
task.
   Unlike more pure Graham style investors, Munger believed his investing style
had to evolve.

     Grahamites … realized that some company that was selling at two or three
     times book value could still be a hell of a bargain because of momentums
     implicit in its position, sometimes combined with an unusual managerial
     skill plainly present in some individual or other, or some system or other.
     And once we’d gotten over the hurdle of recognizing that a thing could be a
     bargain based on quantitative measures that would have horrified Graham,
     we started thinking about better businesses.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


  For Munger, not considering the quality of the underlying business when
buying an asset is far too limiting.

     The investment game always involves considering both quality and price,
     and the trick is to get more quality than you pay for in price. It’s just that
     simple.
                         —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAMN RIGHT, 2000


     We’ve really made the money out of high-quality businesses. In some cases,
     we bought the whole business. And in some cases, we just bought a big
     block of stock. But when you analyze what happened, the big money’s been
     made in the high-quality businesses. And most of the other people who’ve
     made a lot of money have done so in high-quality businesses.

[PDF PAGE 111]
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   Munger believes the greater the quality of a company, the greater the strength
of the wind at your back over the long term.
   How do Munger and Buffett assess quality?

     Leaving the question of price aside, the best business to own is one that,
     over an extended period, can employ large amounts of incremental capital
     at very high rates of return. The worst business to own is one that must, or
     will, do the opposite—that is, consistently employ ever-greater amounts of
     capital at very low rates of return.
             —WARREN BUFFETT, 1992 BERKSHIRE SHAREHOLDER LETTER, 1993


   Munger and Buffett are very focused on both the magnitude and persistence of
the ability of a business to earn a return on capital. Return on invested capital
(ROIC) is the ratio of after-tax operating profit divided by the amount of capital
invested in the business. In short, how much a business earns on the capital
employed in its business determines the quality of that business for Munger and
Buffett. Growth of the business is, by itself, neither good nor bad. In the same
1992 letter, Buffett wrote:

     Growth benefits investors only when the business in point can invest at
     incremental returns that are enticing—in other words, only when each
     dollar used to finance the growth creates over a dollar of long-term market
     value.
             —WARREN BUFFETT, 1992 BERKSHIRE SHAREHOLDER LETTER, 1993



  Eighth Variable: Determining What Businesses to Own (in Whole or in
                                Part)

     We need to have a business with some characteristics that give us a durable
     competitive advantage.
                        —CHARLIE MUNGER, BBC INTERVIEW, 2009


     You really have to know a lot about business. You have to know a lot about
     competitive advantage. You have to know a lot about the maintainability of
     competitive advantage. You have to have a mind that quantifies things in
     terms of value. And you have to compare those values with other values
     available in the stock market.

[PDF PAGE 112]
                          —CHARLIE MUNGER, KIPLINGER, 2005


    Judge the staying quality of the business in terms of its competitive
    advantage.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD LAW BULLETIN, 2001


    We buy barriers. Building them is tough. … Our great brands aren’t
    anything we’ve created. We’ve bought them. If you’re buying something at
    a huge discount to its replacement value and it’s hard to replace, you have a
    big advantage. One competitor is enough to ruin a business running on
    small margins.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2012


    We’re partial to putting out large amounts of money where we won’t have
    to make another decision.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2001


    The difference between a good business and a bad business is that good
    businesses throw up one easy decision after another. The bad businesses
    throw up painful decisions time after time.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 1997


   Why do some businesses create easy decisions for entrepreneurs and
investors? A significant part of the answer lies in microeconomics: if there’s no
significant barrier to entry that creates a sustainable competitive advantage,
inevitable competition will cause the return on investment for that business to
drop to opportunity cost and there will be no economic profit for the producer.
The analogy they use at Berkshire is that the business itself should be viewed as
the equivalent of a castle and the value of that castle will be determined by the
strength of the protective moat.
   Whether a business has a durable moat is without question the most important
attribute for an investor like Munger. He describes a moat in two different ways,
each emphasizing the importance of the moat being able to maintain itself over
time:

    We have to have a business with some inherent characteristics that give it a
    durable competitive advantage.
                       —CHARLIE MUNGER, BBC INTERVIEW, 2009


    We’re trying to buy businesses with sustainable competitive advantages at a

[PDF PAGE 113]
    low—or even a fair price.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


   A more detailed description of the elements of a moat is set out in the
appendix titled Moats. If you have made it this far in this book and have decided
to “operationalize” Buffett and Munger’s version of the Graham value investing
system (which includes considering the quality of the business), you will need to
deeply understand the nature of moats. Cigar-butt Graham value investors may
argue that they have less need to understand the nature of the moats that
companies have, but I believe a sound knowledge of moats is still valuable even
for them. As I have written previously in this book, to evaluate the quality of a
business, you must understand the fundamentals of business. For some people
this will be boring, while others (like me) find it fascinating. If you find this
topic boring, the odds that you will be a successful Graham value investor drop
substantially.

[PDF PAGE 114]
                                          7
             THE RIGHT STUFF IN A BUSINESS


SOME READERS OF     this book about Charlie Munger’s implementation of the
Graham value investing system will probably wonder why it devotes so much
time to what one might call the fundamentals of business. If you start thinking
this way, please remind yourself that a financial asset, like a share of stock, is not
a piece of paper; rather, it is a proportional share in an underlying business. You
cannot be a successful Graham value investor if you do not understand the
underlying business.
   One major fundamental aspect of any business is management. Munger and
Buffett are famous for delegating almost all authority and responsibility to
Berkshire subsidiaries to run their own business, with the exception of capital
allocation and the creation of compensation systems. In other words, while
management of the businesses within Berkshire is extremely decentralized, the
management of capital allocation and compensation systems is extremely
centralized.

1. Capital Allocation Skills

The primary management activity at Berkshire is capital allocation. Munger
wrote:

     Proper allocation of capital is an investor’s number one job.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK, 2005


   The most important task in capital allocation for Buffett and Munger is to take
cash generated by a company like See’s Candies and deploy it to the very best
opportunity at Berkshire. Buffett’s view on the importance of capital allocation
is easily stated:

     Charles T. Munger, Berkshire Hathaway’s vice-chairman, and I really have

[PDF PAGE 115]
     only two jobs. … One is to attract and keep outstanding managers to run
     our various operations. The other is capital allocation.
                —WARREN BUFFETT, THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT, 2011


   Munger and Buffett believe that capital allocation is a skill that many
managers simply do not learn before they become chief executive officers
(CEOs) of companies. They believe that a new CEO may have risen from
marketing, sales, law, or operations and have little actual capital allocation
experience. They believe this can create big problems for a business because the
CEO will often not know how to make critical decisions that will maximize
shareholder return. It is wise to remember that when someone is selling, they are
doing so for a reason. Buffett illustrated this point with an anecdote: A man says
to a veterinarian: “Can you help me? Sometimes my horse walks just fine and
sometimes he limps.”
   The vet replied: “Not a problem. When he’s walking fine, sell him.1
   The most important task in capital allocation is to take cash generated by a
company and deploy it to the very best opportunity and avoid what Buffett called
the institutional imperative:

     Rationality frequently wilts when the institutional imperative comes into
     play. For example: (1) As if governed by Newton’s First Law of Motion, an
     institution will resist any change in its current direction; (2) just as work
     expands to fill available time, corporate projects or acquisitions will
     materialize to soak up available funds; (3) any business craving of the
     leader, however foolish, will be quickly supported by detailed rate-of-return
     and strategic studies prepared by his troops; and (4) the behavior of peer
     companies, whether they are expanding, acquiring, setting executive
     compensation or whatever, will be mindlessly imitated.
                 —WARREN BUFFETT, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 1989


   The culture at Berkshire has been created by Buffett and Munger so as to
reject the institutional imperative like a foreign body. Buffett has devoted
considerable time to making sure this attribute is part of his legacy to Berkshire.
He has written that at Berkshire “a managerial wish list will not be filled at
shareholder expense” and continued his lecture:

     Many managerial [princes] remain serenely confident about the future
     potency of their kisses—even after their corporate backyards are knee-deep
     in unresponsive toads.

[PDF PAGE 116]
            —WARREN BUFFETT, 1981 BERKSHIRE SHAREHOLDER LETTER, 1982



    The heads of many companies are not skilled in capital allocation. Their
    inadequacy is not surprising. Most bosses rise to the top because they have
    excelled in an area such as marketing, production, engineering,
    administration or, sometimes, institutional politics. Once they become
    CEOs, they face new responsibilities. They now must make capital
    allocation decisions, a critical job that they may have never tackled and that
    is not easily mastered. … CEOs who recognize their lack of capital-
    allocation skills (which not all do) will often try to compensate by turning
    to their staffs, management consultants, or investment bankers. Charlie and
    I have frequently observed the consequences of such “help.” On balance,
    we feel it’s more likely to accentuate the capital-allocation problem than to
    solve it. In the end, plenty of unintelligent capital allocation takes place in
    corporate America. (That’s why you hear so much about “restructuring.”)
               —WARREN BUFFETT, 1987 BERKSHIRE ANNUAL LETTER, 1988


2. Compensation Systems That Create Alignment with
Shareholders

Munger believes that compensation systems are too important to delegate:

    It isn’t enough to buy the right business. You also have to have a
    compensation system that’s satisfactory to the people running them. At
    Berkshire Hathaway, we have no [single] system; we have different
    systems. They’re very simple and we don’t tend to revisit them very often.
    It’s amazing how well it’s worked. We wrote a one-page deal with Chuck
    Huggins when we bought See’s and it’s never been touched. We have never
    hired a compensation consultant.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2005


    A man does not deserve huge amounts of pay for creating tiny spreads on
    huge amounts of money. Any idiot can do it. And, as a matter of fact, many
    idiots do.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2009

[PDF PAGE 117]
     I’d rather throw a viper down my shirt front than hire a compensation
     consultant.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2004


   This task is particularly hard in the case of Berkshire because the Berkshire
managers, in most cases, are already rich and have little financial need to work.
For this reason, Munger and Buffett select managers who love what they do
enough that financial motivation is only part of the reason to work as CEOs.
Someone who knows many of the Berkshire CEOs well once told me that they
love working for Buffett and Munger and that the level of personal loyalty to the
two billionaires who run Berkshire is quite high. The best place to see the
Berkshire compensation philosophy set out is in the Berkshire Owner’s Manual,
which      can      be      found      on     the    Berkshire       web     site:
http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/owners.htm.
   Micromanaging what the CEOs of their portfolio companies do is not part of
the Berkshire playbook, says Munger.

     In any big business, you don’t worry whether someone is doing something
     wrong, you worry about whether it’s big and whether it’s material. You can
     do a lot to mitigate bad behavior, but you simply can’t prevent it altogether.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2012


   Of course, fear of micromanagement is not a reason to abdicate all
management responsibilities. A board of directors letting a parade of managers
run down a business is not justified by a fear of micromanagement. Delegation
to the extent practiced by Berkshire Hathaway only works if you follow this rule
as described by Munger:

     Our success has come from the lack of oversight we’ve provided, and our
     success will continue to be from a lack of oversight. But if you’re going to
     provide minimal oversight, you have to buy carefully. It’s a different model
     from GE’s. GE’s works—it’s just very different from ours.
     —CHARLIE MUNGER, NOTES FROM THE BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY ANNUAL MEETING,
                                    2005


3. Moat-Widening Skills

Munger would rather have a great moat than great managers. Of course, he

[PDF PAGE 118]
would rather have both, so he has a greater margin of safety. To make this point,
Buffett commented that, “Good jockeys will do well on good horses, but not on
broken down nags.”2 For example, both the New England textile business and
the department stores that Berkshire owned in its very early years had competent
managers, but the underlying businesses the managers were employed to run
were lodged in quicksand. No amount of managerial skill could have fixed the
problems at these companies. As another example, Ron Johnson, who formerly
was in charge of Apple’s retail operations, may be a great manager of a retail
business, but the fact that the next business he ran (JC Penney) was
fundamentally a lousy business made the critical difference in terms of a
financial result.
   Munger admits there are rare exceptions in which the quality of the business is
less of a driving factor:

     So you do get an occasional opportunity to get into a wonderful business
     that’s being run by a wonderful manager. And, of course, that’s hog heaven
     day. If you don’t load up when you get those opportunities, it’s a big
     mistake. … Averaged out, betting on the quality of business is better than
     betting on the quality of management. In other words, if you have to choose
     one, bet on the business momentum, not the brilliance of the manager. But,
     very rarely, you find a manager who’s so good that you’re wise to follow
     him into what looks like a mediocre business.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


     The only duty of a corporate executive is to widen the moat. We must make
     it wider. Every day is to widen the moat. We gave you a competitive
     advantage, and you must leave us the moat. There are times when it’s too
     tough. But duty should be to widen the moat. I can see instance after
     instance where that isn’t what people do in business. One must keep their
     eye on the ball of widening the moat, to be a steward of the competitive
     advantage that came to you. A General in England said, “Get you the sons
     your fathers got, and God will save the Queen.” At Hewlett Packard, your
     responsibility is to train and deliver a subordinate who can succeed you. It’s
     not all that complicated—all that mumbo jumbo. We make bricks in Texas
     which use the same process as in Mesopotamia.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2008


  Munger wants managers of the business who have an ownership mentality
toward the business, not just the attitude of manager.

[PDF PAGE 119]
    Carnegie was always proud that he took very little salary. Rocke-feller and
    Vanderbilt were the same. It was a common culture in a different era. All of
    these people thought of themselves as the founder. I was delighted to get rid
    of the pressure of getting fees based on performance. If you’re highly
    conscientious and you hate to disappoint, you will feel the pressure to live
    up to your incentive fee. There was an enormous advantage [to switching
    away from taking a percentage of the profits to managing Berkshire, in
    which their interests as shareholders are exactly aligned with other
    shareholders].
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


  Munger and Buffett also want managers to have what Nassim Taleb calls
“skin in the game.”3 They hate situations in which the result is: heads, managers
win and tails, managers do not lose. They want risk and benefits to be
symmetrically allocated. For Munger, the presence of the right incentives for a
manager is critical. Buffett added that he wants to see managers have “a major
portion of their net worth invested in the company. We eat our own cooking.”4
  Munger also fears bureaucracy and Berkshire works hard to prevent it from
lowering returns by creating what they call a seamless web of deserved trust.

    For example, if you worked for AT&T in my day, it was a great
    bureaucracy. Who in the hell was really thinking about the shareholder or
    anything else? And in a bureaucracy, you think the work is done when it
    goes out of your in-basket into somebody else’s in-basket. But, of course, it
    isn’t. It’s not done until AT&T delivers what it’s supposed to deliver. So
    you get big, fat, dumb, unmotivated bureaucracies. … The constant curse of
    scale is that it leads to big, dumb bureaucracy—which, of course, reaches
    its highest and worst form in government, where the incentives are really
    awful. That doesn’t mean we don’t need governments—because we do. But
    it’s a terrible problem to get big bureaucracies to behave.
       —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA (USC) BUSINESS
                                 SCHOOL, 1994


4. Management Already in Place with Integrity

Munger has made it clear that integrity, as a business attribute, is just as
important as talent. Most important, Munger values integrity for itself. Working
with people who have integrity is its own reward. As a bonus, being able to

[PDF PAGE 120]
count on the integrity of a manager is efficient because it means that fewer
resources are required to ensure honesty and compliance.

     We would vastly prefer a management in place with a lot of integrity and
     talent.
                        —CHARLIE MUNGER, BBC INTERVIEW, 2009


   For Munger, a zero-tolerance policy applies to anything related to a lack of
integrity. In other words, a standard of “mostly honest” is not a goal for Munger
when it comes to integrity. Buffett repeatedly had pointed out that a reputation
gained over a lifetime can be lost in less than a second. Munger believes:

     Remember that reputation and integrity are your most valuable assets—and
     can be lost in a heartbeat.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK, 2005


  Hoping that the negative impact of some dishonest people can be managed by
mixing them in with honest people is a triumph of hope over experience in
Munger’s view.

     When you mix raisins with turds, they are still turds.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2000


  It can be harder to spot a lack of integrity than many people imagine, and the
consequences can be significant. Munger makes it clear that he has no desire to
buy an otherwise “good” business with lousy management and then try to find
someone to run it:

     We don’t train executives, we find them. If a mountain stands up like
     Everest, you don’t have to be a genius to figure out that it’s a high
     mountain.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2006


   Munger and Buffett are not interested in investing in company “turnarounds,”
because they seldom actually do turn around. Munger wants the moat of the
company he is investing in to be strong enough to survive bad management. As
was discussed previously, he would prefer to have a moat that is so strong that it
could survive if the company was run by “an idiot.” Neither Buffett nor Munger
is going to buy a business and let some friend or relative run it. However, if they

[PDF PAGE 121]
hypothetically did, they would hope that it would still perform adequately as a
business with an idiot manager due to the moat.

     Network TV [in its heyday,] anyone could run and do well. If Tom Murphy
     is running it, you’d do very well, but even your idiot nephew could do well.
            —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY ANNUAL MEETING, 2006


   Munger is not saying that management does not matter. Instead, he is saying
that he would prefer to have a business that passes the idiot manager test and for
the business to have talented management. Owning a business that has lousy
underlying economics and that is facing one hard problem after another may not
have a good financial outcome even with a top-notch management team,
according to Munger. In that sense, having a moat and talented management,
such as the team that runs the Berkshire portfolio company Iscar, gives Buffett
and Munger an extra margin of safety when making an investment.

5. The Rare Exceptional Manager

Occasionally, Munger and Buffett find a person who has such superior talent that
they really do not need much of a moat. This situation is rare, but it does happen.

     Occasionally, you’ll find a human being who’s so talented that he can do
     things that ordinary skilled mortals can’t. I would argue that Simon Marks
     —who was second generation in Marks & Spencer of England—was such a
     man. Patterson was such a man at National Cash Register. And Sam Walton
     was such a man. These people do come along—and in many cases, they’re
     not all that hard to identity. If they’ve got a reasonable hand—with the
     fanaticism and intelligence and so on that these people generally bring to
     the party—then management can matter much. However, averaged out,
     betting on the quality of a business is better than betting on the quality of
     management. In other words, if you have to choose one, bet on the business
     momentum, not the brilliance of the manager. But, very rarely, you find a
     manager who’s so good that you’re wise to follow him into what looks like
     a mediocre business.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


  Sometimes, as is the case with Berkshire itself, it is worthwhile to bet on a

[PDF PAGE 122]
superior manager. Munger has said:

     There are people—very few—worth paying up to get in with for a long-
     term advantage.
                          —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAMN RIGHT, 2000


   Buffett has pointed out that the talents of Ajit Jain in the reinsurance business
are just such a case. Buffett said at the most recent Berkshire meeting, “Ajit Jain
has created tens of billions of dollars in value for this company out of nothing
but brain and hard work.” That is high praise indeed, because there’s no mention
of any moat in that business by Munger and Buffett.
   Munger feels that the management of a company like Costco is a case in
which management adds to the company moat. For example, he is a huge fan of
Costco’s James Sinegal. But he clearly feels that companies which have
managers like Costco are not easy to find.

     I think it’s dangerous to rely on special talents—it’s better to own lots of
     monopolistic businesses with unregulated prices. But that’s not the world
     today. We have made money exercising our talents and will continue to do
     so. I’m glad we have insurance, though it’s not a no-brainer, I’m warning
     you. We have to be smart to make this work.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2002


   Munger also believes that a skilled manager can sometimes find a relatively
safe market niche:

     I find it quite useful to think of a free-market economy—or partly free-
     market economy—as sort of the equivalent of an ecosystem. Just as animals
     flourish in niches, people who specialize in some narrow niche can do very
     well.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   This strategy is similar to what Professor Michael Porter calls
“differentiation.”5 This approach can be workable, but it is inherently riskier to
try to find a haven from competition in a niche than to have a moat (sometimes it
is better to have both). An example of a niche market in which Munger and
Buffett believe they found a gem of a management team is Iscar:

     Judging the management at a company like Iscar is easy—those people are

[PDF PAGE 123]
    enormously talented and wonderful. But there aren’t many managements
    like that and few people with the incentive of such intensity.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2011


    The reason I got so high on it so fast was that the people are so
    outstandingly talented. The idea of being in business with them just struck
    me worth straining for. We didn’t know when we were young which things
    to stretch for, but by the time we reached Iscar, which we never would have
    bought when we were young, we knew to stretch for the right people. It’s a
    hell of a business. Everything is right there. Isn’t it good that we keep
    learning? Better late than never.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2007


   This description by Bill Gates of the Berkshire philosophy on the importance
of management to a business is a very useful summary:

    [Warren’s] penchant for long-term investments is reflected in another
    aphorism: ‘You should invest in a business that even a fool can run, because
    someday a fool will.’ He doesn’t believe in businesses that rely for their
    success on every employee being excellent. Nor does he believe that great
    people help all that much when the fundamentals of a business are bad. He
    says that when good management is brought into a fundamentally bad
    business, it’s the reputation of the business that remains intact. Warren
    installs strong managers in the companies Berkshire owns, and tends to
    leave them pretty much alone. His basic proposition to managers is that to
    the degree that a company spins off cash, which good businesses do, the
    managers can trust Warren to invest it wisely. He doesn’t encourage
    managers to diversify. Managers are expected to concentrate on the
    businesses they know well so that Warren is free to concentrate on what he
    does well: invest.
                             —BILL GATES, FORTUNE, 1996


  With that last bit of wisdom, I send you off into to the world, hoping that you
too learn to concentrate and invest successfully. Whenever in doubt about
making a decision related to investing (or otherwise), ask yourself this: What
would Charlie Munger do?

[PDF PAGE 124]
                            BERKSHIRE MATH


IN MAKING AN intrinsic value calculation, Berkshire uses the long-term (30-year)
U.S. Treasury rate as the discount rate. This is not a typical approach, and many
people do not fully understand why Berkshire uses this rate. Buffett explained:
     We use the risk-free rate merely to equate one item to another. In other
     words, we’re looking for whatever is the most attractive. In order to
     estimate the present value of anything, we’re going to use a number. And,
     obviously, we can always buy government bonds. Therefore, that becomes
     the yardstick rate … to simply compare all kinds of investment
     opportunities across the spectrum.
                  —WARREN BUFFET, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 1997


  What is happening in this process is an examination of opportunity cost.

     Intelligent people make decisions based on opportunity costs—in other
     words, it’s your alternatives that matter. That’s how we make all of our
     decisions.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2003


   Munger thinks about the opportunity cost of capital by considering what the
alternatives are for that capital. Buffett has said, “Charlie and I don’t know our
cost of capital. … We measure everything against our alternatives.”1 Why would
you buy an investment that is not in your top 2 percent of opportunities? As has
been explained previously, this will lead to a concentrated portfolio that is
perfectly acceptable to Munger. Because he believes that risk comes from not
knowing what you are doing, he has adopted a focused investing style, which
will be explained below.
   “How does Munger account for risk when he buys an asset?” He will only
invest if he strongly believes the current earnings are nearly certain to continue.
While most other investors will adjust the discount rate for what they may
believe to be greater risk, Berkshire wants essentially no risk as a starting point.
In other words, rather than adjust the discount rate to account for risk, Munger
and Buffett use a risk-free rate to compare alternative investments. They look for

[PDF PAGE 125]
both conservatively determined fundamentals and a stable business history,
which indicate to them that the current state of the business in question will
continue. However, to provide a cushion against mistakes, they will not actually
buy an asset without at least a 25 percent discount in intrinsic value (this
discount is their margin of safety).
   The theory behind Munger’s very different approach to dealing with risk is
worth examining in detail. As a review, risk is the possibility of suffering a loss
(not price volatility). The way Berkshire deals with risk is by buying what they
feel is a conservatively valued asset with no risk at a discount price. Their focus
is on having protection against mistakes that they may make during that process.
What they do not do is increase the interest rate used in the computation to deal
with risks inherent in the business. If there are significant risks inherent in the
business itself, they put the decision in the too hard pile and move on to other
potential opportunities.
   The mathematical process that Munger and Buffett use at Berkshire is simple.
(Please do not stop reading because I used the word mathematics.) First,
Berkshire calculates the past and current “owner’s earnings” of the business.
Then they insert into the formula a reasonable and conservative growth rate of
the owner’s earnings. They solve for the present value of the owner’s earnings
by discounting using the 30-year U.S. Treasury rate. The focus of the investing
process at Berkshire is on return on equity (ROE), not earnings per share (EPS).
As an aside, Munger believes that every manager of a business should be
thinking about intrinsic value when making all capital allocation decisions. Note
that Berkshire does not use price to earnings multiples in calculating value.
Owner’s earnings is a very specific type of earnings, and they stick to that set of
figures.
   In determining intrinsic value, Munger doesn’t swallow the stories of
promoters who sing songs and tell tall tales about EBITDA (earnings before
interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) and non-GAAP (generally
accepted accounting principles) “earnings.” He likes genuine free cash flow. He
considers “drowning in cash” to be a very good thing indeed. On the topic of
non-GAPP earnings, Munger has said this:
         I don’t even like to hear the word EBITDA.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, Q&A WITH SIX BUSINESS SCHOOLS, 2009

[PDF PAGE 126]
                                     MOATS


MUNGER HAS NOT explained his theories on what creates and sustains a moat as
comprehensively as Buffett, but he has made some comments that point people
in the right direction.
   The five primary elements that can help create a moat are as follows:

1. Supply-Side Economies of Scale and Scope

If a company’s average costs fall when more of a product or service is produced,
there are supply-side economies of scale. Intel is a classic example of a business
that benefits from economies of scale. In Munger’s view, Wal-Mart has
substantial supply-side economies of scale through its investments in distribution
and other systems. Companies that operate huge steel plants and shipyards can
also have supply-side economies of scale. Munger described two different
supply-side economies of scale:

     On the subject of economies of scale, I find chain stores quite interesting.
     Just think about it. The concept of a chain store was a fascinating invention.
     You get this huge purchasing power—which means that you have lower
     merchandise costs. You get a whole bunch of little laboratories out there in
     which you can conduct experiments. And you get specialization. If one
     little guy is trying to buy across twenty-seven different merchandise
     categories influenced by traveling salesmen, he’s going to make a lot of
     dumb decisions. But if your buying is done in headquarters for a huge
     bunch of stores, you can get very bright people who know a lot about
     refrigerators and so forth to do the buying. The reverse is demonstrated by
     the little store where one guy is doing all the buying. So there are huge
     purchasing advantages.
         Some [supply-side advantages] come from simple geometry. If you’re
     building a great circular tank, obviously as you build it bigger, the amount
     of steel you use in the surface goes up with the square and the cubic volume

[PDF PAGE 127]
     goes up with the cube. So as you increase the dimensions, you can hold a
     lot more volume per unit area of steel. There are all kinds of things like that
     where the simple geometry—the simple reality—gives you an advantage of
     scale.

 —CHARLIE MUNGER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA (USC) BUSINESS SCHOOL,
                                   1994


     You can get advantages of scale from TV advertising. When TV advertising
     first arrived—when talking color pictures first came into our living rooms
     —it was an unbelievably powerful thing. And in the early days, we had
     three networks that had whatever it was—say 90 percent of the audience.
     Well, if you were Procter & Gamble, you could afford to use this new
     method of advertising. You could afford the very expensive cost of network
     television because you were selling so damn many cans and bottles. Some
     little guy couldn’t. And there was no way of buying it in part. Therefore, he
     couldn’t use it. In effect, if you didn’t have a big volume, you couldn’t use
     network TV advertising—which was the most effective technique. So when
     TV came in, the branded companies that were already big got a huge tail
     wind.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   Although Berkshire was a bit late to appreciate the financial attractiveness of
the railroad business, Munger and Buffett clearly value the moat that supply-side
economies of scale create in that business. A new competitor in the railroad
business is highly unlikely. If the public roads deteriorate because the United
States underinvests in infrastructure, Buffett and Munger believe railroads will
become even more valuable. Munger is very positive on the future of the railroad
business.

     Do you know what it would cost to replace Burlington Northern today? We
     are not going to build another transcontinental. And those assets are
     valuable, have utility. Now they want to raise diesel prices on trucks. … We
     finally realized that railroads now have a huge competitive advantage, with
     double stacked rail cars, guided by computers, moving more and more
     production from China, etc. They have a big advantage over truckers in
     huge classes of business.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2008

[PDF PAGE 128]
     We don’t know how to buy stocks by metrics. … We know that Burlington
     Northern will have a competitive advantage in years. … We don’t know
     what the heck Apple will have. … You really have to understand the
     company and its competitive positions. … That’s not disclosed by the math.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2013


  The railroad industry is interesting in that long ago they were a growth
industry that created both great fortunes and great busts in the aftermath of that
success. There were many times in history when railroads were very lousy
investments.
  Regarding the impact of supply-side economies of scale, Munger has pointed
out:

     In some businesses, the very nature of things cascades toward the
     overwhelming dominance of one firm. It tends to cascade to a winner-take-
     all result. And these advantages of scale are so great, for example, that
     when Jack Welch came into General Electric, he just said, “to hell with it.
     We’re either going to be number one or two in every field we’re in or we’re
     going to be out.” That was a very tough-minded thing to do, but I think it
     was a correct decision if you’re thinking about maximizing shareholder
     wealth.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   If it is cost efficient for a company to produce several different products or
services, a company can also benefit from supply-side economies of scope. To
benefit from economies of scope, a business must share resources across markets
while keeping the amount of those resources largely fixed. Businesses that desire
to benefit from economies of scope must avoid running as isolated units.


             2. Demand-Side Economies of Scale (Network Effects)

Demand-side economies of scale (also known as “network effects”) result when
a product or service becomes more valuable as more people use it. Craigslist,
eBay, Twitter, Facebook, and other so-called multi-sided markets have demand-
side economies of scale that operate on their behalf. American Express is an
example of a company in the Berkshire portfolio with network effect benefits;
the more merchants that accept their card, the more valuable the service gets,
and the more people who use the card, the more valuable the services are for

[PDF PAGE 129]
merchants. Munger has said:

     It would be easier to screw up American Express than Coke or Gillette, but
     it’s an immensely strong business.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2000


   A company having beneficial network effects is only one dimension that
impacts profit. Sometimes, network effects exist but the market is small because
it is a niche. Amazon’s market is massive, and that matters greatly in terms of
the market capitalization it can generate. Some network effects are very strong
and some are weak.
   Some companies have both demand-side and supply-side economies of scale.
Amazon has both supply-side and demand-side economies of scale, and they
reinforce each other. The more people who provide comments on Amazon, the
more valuable it becomes to other users due to demand-side economies. Amazon
also has huge advantages with their warehouses and the supply chain on the
supply side.

3. Brand

Understanding how Munger thinks about brand is best illustrated by an example.
For many years, Munger was the chairman of a company called Wesco
Financial. At the 2011 meeting of Wesco, which was held just before it was
merged into Berkshire Hathaway, Munger admitted that he and Buffett really did
not understand the value of a brand until they bought See’s Candies.
  See’s Candies is also a great side-by-side test of brand power. To illustrate, if
you grew up in a home that bought See’s Candies (mostly on the West Coast,
especially in California,) and your experiences around that candy have very
favorable associations, you will pay more for a box bearing the See’s Candies
brand. By contrast, someone who grew up on the East Coast of the United States
will not attribute much value to that brand because they do not have those same
experiences. For this reason, See’s Candies has found it hard to expand
regionally and has done so very slowly. What See’s Candies sells is not just
food, but rather an experience. Because box candy sales are highest during
holiday seasons, the financial results of the company are also very lumpy. See’s
Candies generates losses two quarters a year and makes all its profit in the other
two quarters around three holidays.

[PDF PAGE 130]
  Buffett talks about the fact that building some brands took many decades:

     When you were a 16-year-old, you took a box of candy on your first date
     with a girl and gave it either to her parents or to her. In California the girls
     slap you when you bring Russell Stover, and kiss you when you bring
     See’s. … I don’t think See’s means anything to people on the East Coast,
     where people are also exposed to higher-end chocolate products.
      —WARREN BUFFET, “THE SECRETS OF SEE’S CANDIES,” FORTUNE MAGAZINE, 2012


   While some of the power of a brand can come from taste, modern flavor firms
can replicate almost any taste. Trade dress and presentation of a good or service
matters more than ever. A lot of Tiffany’s brand power lies in the blue box the
jewelry comes in. Coke made a massive mistake thinking it was flavor that
mattered most in a blind taste test when it introduced New Coke. When the taste
test was not blind, Coke won; when it was blind, Coke did not win. Munger said
once about the New Coke episode:

     [Coke spent] 100 years getting people to believe that trademark had all
     these intangible values too. And people associate it with a flavor. … Pepsi
     was within weeks of coming out with old Coke in a Pepsi bottle, which
     would’ve been the biggest fiasco in modern times. Perfect insanity.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 1995


   A moat powered by a brand is something very different from one created via
supply-side or demand-side economies of scale. For example, Buffett believes
that for a company like Disney, when the brand is mentioned in conversation
“you have something in your mind.” He added:

     How would you try to create a brand that competes with Disney? Coke is a
     brand associated with people being happy around the world. That is what
     you want to have in a business. That is the moat. You want that moat to
     widen.
                    —WARREN BUFFETT, VANDERBILT VISIT NOTES, 2005


   Brands, of course, can fail over time. Put a luxury brand on a shelf at Costco,
as some have done, and that luxury brand can be damaged for certain customers.
License it too broadly and the brand can also be damaged. Buffett and Munger
are attracted to brands that they use in their own lives. See’s Candies and Dairy
Queen are just two examples.

[PDF PAGE 131]
   Some brands incur problems with their brand that are completely self-
inflicted. Buffett went on to say about one of his most favorite brands:

     Take See’s Candies. You cannot destroy the brand of See’s Candies. Only
     See’s can do that. You have to look at the brand as a promise to the
     customer that we are going to offer the quality and service that is expected.
     We link the product with happiness. You don’t see See’s Candies
     sponsoring the local funeral home. We are at the Thanksgiving Day parades
     though.
           —WARREN BUFFETT, NOTES FROM UNIVERSITY OF GEORGIA VISIT, 2007


   Regarding brand power, the two Berkshire leaders have often cited Wrigley’s
as a brand that creates a strong moat. Munger has pointed out:

     The informational advantage of brands is hard to beat. And your advantage
     of scale can be an informational advantage. If I go to some remote place, I
     may see Wrigley chewing gum alongside Glotz’s chewing gum. Well, I
     know that Wrigley is a satisfactory product, whereas I don’t know anything
     about Glotz’s. So if one is $0.40 and the other is $0.30, am I going to take
     something I don’t know and put it in my mouth—which is a pretty personal
     place, after all—for a lousy dime? So, in effect, Wrigley, simply by being so
     well known, has advantages of scale—what you might call an informational
     advantage. Everyone is influenced by what others do and approve. Another
     advantage of scale comes from psychology. The psychologists use the term
     “social proof.” We are all influenced—subconsciously and to some extent
     consciously—by what we see others do and approve. Therefore, if
     everybody’s buying something, we think it’s better. We don’t like to be the
     one guy who’s out of step. Again, some of this is at a subconscious level
     and some of it isn’t. Sometimes, we consciously and rationally think, “Gee,
     I don’t know much about this. They know more than I do. Therefore, why
     shouldn’t I follow them?” All told, your advantages can add up to one
     tough moat.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   A very important test for Buffett and Munger in determining the strength of a
brand-based moat is whether a competitor can replicate or weaken the moat with
a massive checkbook. As just one example, here is what Buffett said about Coke
at the 2012 Berkshire meeting: “If you gave me $10, $20, $30 billion to knock
off Coca-Cola, I couldn’t do it.”1 That is in his view what defines a strong moat.

[PDF PAGE 132]
Firms like Nike and BMW each have brands that help maintain their moat,
which were hard to get and are super valuable to have. Michael Mauboussin
wrote: “Brands do not confer advantages in and of themselves. Brands only
increase value if they increase customer willingness to pay or reduce the cost to
provide the good or service.”2 The creation of a great brand is a rare thing that
requires considerable skill—and arguably a big dose of luck as well.

4. Regulation

Certain businesses have created a competence with regard to regulation that is so
strong that the regulation itself actually serves as a moat. Regulations can often
end up protecting existing entrenched producers rather than helping consumers.
For example, some people believe banks have created such a powerful layer of
regulatory expertise that the regulators have become captured by the industry
they regulate. Similarly, there are a number of professional guilds, like lawyers,
that have been able to use regulation to limit supply.
   For Berkshire, the regulation-driven moat that Moody’s possessed in the bond
rating business was a big attraction. To issue bonds, regulators actually require
that the issuer get an opinion from a very small number of bond rating firms,
which means that rating firms like Moody’s, S&P, and Fitch have a moat. When
regulation disappears, it often becomes quickly evident that it was a major factor
in industry profitability. In other words, you find out who is swimming naked
when the regulatory-driven moat disappears.

5. Patents and Intellectual Property

Companies that have been granted a patent, trademark, or other type of
intellectual property by the government have in effect been given a legal
monopoly. This barrier to entry can create a substantial moat for the owner of the
intellectual property. You may or may not think too many patents have been
granted or have been granted in inappropriate ways, but the value of a patent,
once granted, is a different point.
   Regarding the value of intellectual property, Munger has said this:

     In microeconomics, of course, you’ve got the concept of patents,
     trademarks, exclusive franchises, and so forth. Patents are quite interesting.

[PDF PAGE 133]
    When I was young, I think more money went into patents than came out.
    Judges tended to throw them out—based on arguments about what was
    really invented and what relied on prior art. That isn’t altogether clear. But
    they changed that. They didn’t change the laws. They just changed the
    administration, so that it all goes to one patent court. And that court is now
    very much more pro-patent. So I think people are now starting to make a lot
    of money out of owning patents. But trademarks and franchises have
    always been great. Trademarks, of course, have always made people a lot of
    money. A trademark system is a wonderful thing for a big operation if it’s
    well known.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


  One example of a company that Berkshire values higher due to intellectual
property patents is Lubrizol. Buffett said once:

    It struck me as a business I didn’t know anything about initially. You know,
    you’re talking about petroleum additives. … Are there competitive moats,
    is there ease of entry, all that sort of thing? I did not have any understanding
    of that at all initially. And I talked to Charlie a few days later. … and
    Charlie says, “I don’t understand it either.”
                 —WARREN BUFFETT, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2008


  Eventually, Buffett was won over and made the Lubrizol purchase. Buffet said
once:

    I decided there’s probably a good size moat on this. They’ve got lots and
    lots of patents, but more than that they have a connection with customers.
                 —WARREN BUFFETT, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2008


   At the 2011 Berkshire meeting, Buffett reiterated that he decided to go ahead
because he thought that the more than 1,600 patents held by Lubrizol would give
the company “a durable competitive advantage.”
   Another example of intellectual property proving its value for Munger
occurred in the 1970s, when Russell Stover Candies started to open stores in
markets served by See’s Candies. The Russell Stover stores were designed to be
very similar in appearance to See’s Candies stores. By asserting intellectual
property rights, Munger was able to get an agreement from Russell Stover to
stop opening similar stores through the threat of litigation.

[PDF PAGE 134]
                     Cumulative Impact of Many Factors

Some businesses, like Berkshire, have been able to create a moat as a result of a
combination of better systems and culture than their competitors. One way to
understand this point is to look at Berkshire and ask whether it has a moat. In
other words, while Berkshire has Buffett and Munger, what else does the
company have that acts as a barrier to entry creating sustainable competitive
advantage? Berkshire has many elements that make up the whole of its moat,
and they are further amplified by the way the elements “fit” together. In short,
the aggregate value that these elements create is greater than the sum of the
parts.
   This section presents a few of the elements that collectively create Berkshire’s
moat.

1. Berkshire Is Tax Efficient

When a given Berkshire portfolio company (e.g., See’s Candies) generates cash,
that cash is rarely invested in more See’s Candies stores, manufacturing plants,
or acquisitions because the return on capital would be lower than other
alternatives within Berkshire. Because of Berkshire’s structure, Buffett is able to
move that cash from See’s Candies to the greatest opportunity on a tax-efficient
basis (without paying the tax that would be imposed if See’s Candies paid a
dividend or See’s shares were sold and the money reinvested). Buffett
elaborated:

     Because we still have this ability to redistribute money in a tax-efficient
     way within the company, we can reallocate it to where it will earn a higher
     return than shareholders may on their own.
                 —WARREN BUFFETT, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2008


  Munger added this:

     Another very simple effect I seldom see discussed by either investment
     managers or anybody else is the effect of taxes. If you’re going to buy
     something which compounds for 30 years at 15 percent per annum and you
     pay one 35 percent tax at the very end, the way that works out is that after
     taxes, you keep 13.3 percent per annum. In contrast, if you bought the same

[PDF PAGE 135]
    investment but had to pay taxes every year of 35 percent out of the 15
    percent that you earned, then your return would be 15 percent minus 35
    percent of 15 percent or only 9.75 percent per year compounded. So the
    difference there is over 3.5 percent. And what 3.5 percent does to the
    numbers over long holding periods like 30 years is truly eye-opening. If
    you sit back for long, long stretches in great companies, you can get a huge
    edge from nothing but the way that income taxes work.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


    WB talks about increasing book value after paying full corporate taxes of
    35 percent. Indices don’t have to pay taxes.
                —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2014


2. Berkshire Has Low Overhead

At a Wesco meeting, Munger said:

    A lot of people think if you just had more process and more compliance—
    checks and double-checks and so forth—you could create a better result in
    the world. Well, Berkshire has had practically no process. We had hardly
    any internal auditing until they forced it on us. We just try to operate in a
    seamless web of deserved trust and be careful whom we trust.
                  —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2007


   Trust-based systems in which managers must “eat their own cooking” are core
to Berkshire’s culture, which translates to lower overhead. The New York Times
put it this way:

    [Berkshire] has a corporate headquarters with a mere twenty-five people on
    a single floor of an office building. From there Mr. Buffett and his staff
    allocate capital and contemplate acquisitions or sales, hire or fire people to
    run those portfolio companies, and otherwise stay out of the way.
                               —NEW YORK TIMES, 2014


  Morningstar added: “All of the firm’s operating companies are managed on a
decentralized basis, eliminating the need for layers of management control and
pushing responsibility down to the subsidiary level, where managers are
empowered to make their own decisions.”3

[PDF PAGE 136]
  In order for this “seamless web of deserved trust” system to work, you must
have great managers and have the right incentives in place. Berkshire’s culture is
designed to ensure that anyone who succeeds Buffett will know how to do this.
Buffett said at the 2014 Berkshire shareholder’s meeting that if Berkshire has a
weakness, it is that they tend to over-trust, but with that comes low overhead.
The “seamless web of trust” system is itself part of the Berkshire moat.


                3. Berkshire Is the Private Buyer of First Resort

If you have spent your life building a business and decide to sell the company,
Buffett and Munger offer you a unique opportunity. They will let you (and in
fact want you) to continue running the business. Your other option is selling the
business to a private equity firm that does not give a damn about your business
and will probably load it up with debt, creating a serious risk that the company
will fail. Buffett has a track record of keeping the business, instead of playing
what Munger calls “a game of gin rummy” with it and other holdings, which
makes Berkshire attractive to many sellers of a business.4
   People who sell businesses to Berkshire are rich enough that they have more
money than they will ever need. Berkshire gives the selling owner the chance to
make sure that the business they care about and the people that work there
continue to thrive. For this reason, Berkshire gets offered the opportunity to buy
businesses at very attractive prices. Buffett said in the most recent shareholder’s
meeting: “Private equity firms buy businesses, but they’re looking to sell those
holdings down the road.”5 To reassure selling owners, Buffett holds on to
businesses even if returns are less than stellar. Here’s Buffett on this point:

     You would not get a passing grade in business school if you put down our
     principles for why we keep some businesses, but we made a promise. If we
     don’t keep our promise, word would get around. We list the economic
     principles, so managers who sell to us know they can count on it. We can’t
     make some promises, and we don’t promise never to sell. But we’ve only
     had to get rid of a few businesses, including the original textile business.
     We also let managers continue to run their business. We are now in a class
     that is hard to compete with. A private equity firm won’t be impressed by
     what we put in the back of our annual report. People who are rich and run a
     company their grandfather started—they don’t want to hand it over to a
     couple of MBAs who want to show their stuff. As long as we behave
     properly, we will maintain that asset, and many will have trouble competing

[PDF PAGE 137]
     with it.
                  —WARREN BUFFETT, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2014


   This phenomenon creates a positive reputation for Berkshire and contributes
to the moat.

4. Berkshire Has Permanent Capital

Berkshire has permanent capital, which greatly enables the company to
outperform other investors. Noted Graham value investor Bruce Berkowitz
explained:

     That is the secret sauce: permanent capital. That is essential. I think that’s
     the reason Buffett gave up his partnership. You need it, because when push
     comes to shove, people run. … That’s why we keep a lot of cash around. …
     Cash is the equivalent of financial Valium. It keeps you cool, calm and
     collected.
                —BRUCE BERKOWITZ, UNIVERSITY OF MIAMI INTERVIEW, 2012


5. Berkshire Outperforms in Down Markets

Because Buffett and Munger are Graham value investors, Berkshire uses an
investing approach designed to outperform in “up” markets and overperform in
“down” markets. The goal of a value investor is superior absolute performance,
not relative performance. Buffett put it simply: “We will underperform in strong
years, we will match in medium years, and we will do better in down years. We
will outperform over a cycle, but there’s no guarantee on that.”6 Other investors,
like Seth Klarman, use the same approach. The facts support this conclusion.
Ben Carlson pointed out: “It’s the down years where Buffett has really extended
his lead, outperforming the market by almost 25 percent per year when stocks
fall. This is his secret sauce.”7 Howard Marks pointed out the following rules for
a value investor: “Rule No. 1: Most things will prove to be cyclical. Rule No. 2:
Some of the greatest opportunities for gain and loss come when other people
forget Rule No. 1.”8 Buffett has his own version of this which states: “Rule No. 1
is never lose money. Rule No. 2 is never forget rule number one.”9 Berkshire’s
results must be compared with alternatives on a risk-adjusted basis.

[PDF PAGE 138]
6. Berkshire Benefits from Float

Berkshire’s insurance operations generate low-cost float (cash that comes in
from insurance premiums collected well in advance of future insurance claims).
This float is a major source of funding for investments. At Berkshire, float has
grown from $39 million in 1970 to just over $77 billion in 2014, and significant
amounts of that cash can be put to work within Berkshire. Because Berkshire has
access to float, its financial returns will not be your financial returns unless you
also own an insurance company. You will never be as rich as Buffett without
access to float. However, that does not mean that you should not be a Graham
value investor anyway.

7. High-Quality Shareholders, Including Buffett and
Munger

High-quality shareholders don’t panic and think long term about investing
results. That a company may have a moat at a given time is insufficient. In
Munger’s view, even if you currently have a very profitable business, that does
not mean that profitability will persist for very long. The process of what Joseph
Schumpeter called “creative destruction”10 is as powerful as anything in
business. Having a moat is the only way to fight against the tide of competitive
destruction.
   Michael Mauboussin, in what is arguably the best essay ever on moats, wrote:

     Companies generating high economic returns will attract competitors
     willing to take a lesser, albeit still attractive, return which will drive down
     aggregate industry returns to the opportunity cost of capital.
                  —MICHAEL MAUBOUSSIN, “MEASURING THE MOAT,” 2002


   For example, if you open a very successful clothing store with certain
innovative attributes, that success will attract imitators and competitors. Through
a process of creative destruction, some clothing stores will adapt and survive and
thrive and others will fail. The consumer wins because the products and services
offered to them get better and better. However, this is a painful process for an
investor since the outcome can be highly uncertain. It is also the hardest part for

[PDF PAGE 139]
a businessperson because failure is an essential part of capitalism.
   Given the inevitability of relentless competition, the question to ask,
according to Munger, is as follows:

     How do you compete against a true fanatic? You can only try to build the
     best possible moat and continuously attempt to widen it.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, POOR CHARLIE’S ALMANACK, 2005


   Jim Sinegal of Costco is just such a fanatic; that’s why Munger serves on their
board. The founder of Nebraska Furniture Mart, Rose Blumkin (“Mrs. B”),
would be another fanatic. Munger loves the management team at Berkshire
portfolio company Iscar. Going down the list of Berkshire CEOs reveals a long
list of fanatics.
   One reason that capitalism works is because moats are hard to create and
usually deteriorate over time. What happens over time is that so-called producer
surplus is transferred into consumer surplus. Munger described the competitive
process and why it benefits consumers as follows:

     The major success of capitalism is its ability to drench business owners in
     feedback and allocate talent efficiently. If you have an area with twenty
     restaurants, and suddenly eighteen are out of business, the remaining two
     are in good, capable hands. Business owners are constantly being reminded
     of benefits and punishments. That’s psychology explaining economics.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2011


  Munger’s views on the nature of business competition are Darwinian. He
believes that capitalism does not pull its punches in markets that are genuinely
competitive:

     Over the very long term, history shows that the chances of any business
     surviving in a manner agreeable to a company’s owners are slim at best.
                    —CHARLIE MUNGER, THE DHANDHO INVESTOR, 2007


     Capitalism is a pretty brutal place.
                     —CHARLIE MUNGER, USC BUSINESS SCHOOL, 1994


   When it comes to moats, durability matters. Munger wants to avoid a business
that has a moat today but loses it tomorrow. Some moats atrophy gradually over
time and some fade much more quickly. As Ernest Hemingway said in The Sun

[PDF PAGE 140]
Also Rises, a business can go bankrupt in two ways: “gradually and then
suddenly.” The speed of moat destruction has accelerated over time due to
advances in technology and the way it spreads information. For some people,
this increase in speed can at times be disorienting. For example, the speed with
which companies like Kodak or Nortel lost their moats has been shocking to
many investors who grew up mostly in another era.
   The speed with which a moat disappears should not be confused with cases
where a company never had a moat. How long your moat lasts is called your
competitive advantage period (CAP), according to Michael Mauboussin. The
speed of moat dissipation will be different in each case and need not be constant.
The rate at which a moat atrophies is similar to what academics call fade, argued
Michael Mauboussin.11
   Even the very best companies can see competition make their moats shrink or
even disappear. Munger has said:

     Frequently, you’ll look at a business having fabulous results. And the
     question is, “How long can this continue?” Well, there’s only one way I
     know to answer that. And that’s to think about why the results are occurring
     now—and then to figure out what could cause those results to stop
     occurring.
                         —CHARLIE MUNGER, DAMN RIGHT, 2000


  Newspapers are a good example of an industry that once had a fantastic moat
but now is in decline. Unfortunately for newspapers, changes in technology have
been taking down their moat in rather dramatic fashion.

     The perfectly fabulous economics of this [newspaper] business could
     become grievously impaired.
                   —CHARLIE MUNGER, WESCO ANNUAL MEETING, 2000


   Munger saw this deterioration before many other people did, most likely
because Berkshire owned newspaper properties like the Washington Post and
The Buffalo News. Berkshire has not given up on all types of newspapers. Papers
that cover local news, particularly in a city with a strong sense of community, are
still attractive for Berkshire. They said at the 2012 Berkshire meeting that they
may buy more newspapers. These small-city newspaper purchases seem like a
Ben Graham cigar-butt style investment, and for that reason a reversion to an old
investing style. But Berkshire has a huge amount of cash to put to work and only
so many quality businesses to buy. Munger added:

[PDF PAGE 141]
     Excess cash is an advantage, not a disadvantage.
                 —CHARLIE MUNGER, BERKSHIRE ANNUAL MEETING, 2012


  As a pool of investment dollars gets bigger, it gets harder to find companies to
buy or invest in that have a moat. In this sense, size works against investment
performance. More than one fund manager has suffered from this problem
because the tendency is to ignore the need for a strong moat so you can get large
amounts of money put to work.
  Kodak is a company that once had a strong moat but then began to lose it
drastically. Munger described the competitive destruction that hit the
photography business:

     What happened to Kodak is a natural outcome of competitive capitalism.
                       —CHARLIE MUNGER, CNBC INTERVIEW, 2012


   It is true that what happened to Kodak was rough, but the full story according
to Munger should take into account that there was a part of Kodak that did have
a moat and will survive:

     People think the whole thing failed, but they forget that Kodak didn’t really
     go broke, because Eastman Chemical did survive as a prosperous company
     and they spun that off.
                           —CHARLIE MUNGER, FORTUNE, 2012


   The challenge any company that has lost its moat faces is both substantial and
terrifying. Once a feedback loop turns negative, it is hard for any company to
regain what it once had. Precisely the factors that created the moat in the first
place can tear the company down just as fast or faster. If the ride up was
nonlinear, it is very possible that the ride down will be nonlinear as well.
   As another example, Munger has said that department stores in downtown
areas once had a very strong moat, given the economies of scale and their central
locations near mass transit. However, the way people lived started to change as
cars became more affordable and people migrated to suburbs with shopping
centers. The arrival of Amazon.com in the retail business has further damaged
the moat of the big-box retailers of all kinds, whether in the city or the suburbs.
   What determines whether a company has a moat is qualitative (e.g., supply-
side and demand-side economies of scale, brand, regulation, and intellectual
property), but how you test to determine the strength of the moat is quantitative
(i.e., it’s a mathematical exercise). Mathematical formulas will not tell you how

[PDF PAGE 142]
to get a moat, but they can help prove that you have one—at least for now. To
test whether you have a moat with a given company, determine if you are
earning profits that are greater than your opportunity cost of capital (OCC). If
that level of profitability has been maintained for some reasonable period
(measured in years), then you have a strong moat. If the size of the positive
difference between return on invested capital (ROIC) and OCC is large and if
that spread is persistent over time, your moat is relatively strong. Exactly how
long the moat must persist to meet this test is an interesting question. If it is not a
period of at least two years, you are taking a significant risk. Five years of
supporting data give you more certainty that your moat is sustainable. For more
on this subject, read Michael Mauboussin’s essay “Measuring the Moat,” which
is a classic.
   Spotting the existence of a moat that has not been fully taken advantage of by
its current ownership can be profitable for an investor buying that business.
Munger pointed out:

     There are actually businesses that you will find a few times in a lifetime,
     where any manager could raise the return enormously just by raising prices
     —and yet they haven’t done it. So they have huge untapped pricing power
     that they’re not using. That is the ultimate no-brainer. … Disney found that
     it could raise those prices a lot and the attendance stayed right up. So a lot
     of the great record of Eisner and Wells … came from just raising prices at
     Disneyland and Disneyworld and through video cassette sales of classic
     animated movies. … At Berkshire Hathaway, Warren and I raised the prices
     of See’s candy a little faster than others might have. And, of course, we
     invested in Coca-Cola—which had some untapped pricing power. And it
     also had brilliant management. So a Goizueta and Keough could do much
     more than raise prices. It was perfect.
             —CHARLIE MUNGER, CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, 1997


   Starting with See’s Candies, Munger and Buffett learned that when you have a
great moat (in this case driven by a powerful but primarily regional brand), the
business can raise prices to improve profitability. They also learned that some
brands translate less well to new markets, and there is a limit on how many box
candy stores one can profitably build in a given geographic area.
   At a very practical level, the discussion above illustrates that there are some
rules of thumb one can use to test the strength of a moat. At the top of the list is
whether the business has pricing power. For example, if you must hold a prayer
meeting before you try to raise prices, then you do not have much of a moat, if

[PDF PAGE 143]
any, argues Buffett.
   There’s nothing sinister about the term moat. Business is, by its very nature, a
competitive process. Even a small restaurant selling barbecue can have a moat. A
company that has a return on capital significantly greater than its opportunity
cost over time has a moat, whether they know it or not.
   Munger and Buffett have said that there are also three different skills that
relate to moats: creating a moat, identifying a moat that others have created, and
identifying a startup that may acquire a moat before it is evident.
   Creating a moat is something that people like Ray Kroc, Sam Walton, Estee
Lauder, Mary Kay Ash, and Bill Gates have accomplished. Moat creation
requires superior management skills, always combined with some degree of
luck. It is theoretically possible to acquire a moat with no management talent and
just luck, but I can’t think of an example of this ever happening. Sometimes
people who are fantastic managers and have the ability to create a moat have
very poor skills when it comes to investing. Stock promoters love these people
because they are big targets for scams.
   Identifying a moat others have created is something that people like Munger
and Buffett can do. Munger admits that he and Buffett buy moats rather than
build them, because building them is not something they do particularly well. In
addition to a moat, Munger insists that there be a talented management team
already in place. For investors who buy moats instead of creating one, the
existence of a moat has special value because they can sometimes survive
financially, even if management talent does not deliver as expected or if they
leave the business.
   Identifying a startup that may acquire a moat before it becomes evident is
something that some venture capitalists can do when there is a sufficiently high
level of probability that they can generate an attractive return on capital overall.
Venture capitalists harvest something called optionality, which is a different
form of arbitrage than Graham’s value investing system. The skill needed to be
successful as a venture capitalist is rare, as evidenced by the fact that the
distribution of returns in venture capital is a power law. Moats that emerge from
complex adaptive systems like an economy are hard to spot. This is because a
moat is something that is greater than the sum of its parts, emerging from
something else that is greater than the sum of its parts. In contrast, a moat being
destroyed is easier to spot because this is a process of something transforming
into nothing.
   Each of these three business skills is very different, and it is very unusual for a
person to have all three skills. For society, this overconfidence is valuable
because “even a blind squirrel finds a nut once in a while” via luck. However, at

[PDF PAGE 144]
the individual level, there are a lot of unnecessary bankruptcies. What is good
overall for society is not good for individuals.

[PDF PAGE 145]
       VALUE INVESTING VS. FACTOR INVESTING


BEN GRAHAM AND his disciples, like Warren Buffett, Howard Marks, and Seth
Klarman, have developed a system called value investing. Eugene Fama and Ken
French developed a completely different factor investing approach that identifies
“value stocks.” Although Ben Graham’s system and Fama/French’s approach
share the word value, they are vastly and fundamentally different.
   It is important to draw a clear and simple definitional distinction between
value as a statistical factor (Fama/French) and value as an analytical style or
goal (Ben Graham). The two methods are solving for different questions:
Fama/French is solving for what creates a persistent disparity of return across
large numbers of stocks, while Graham-style value investors are solving for
where can one find low risk of permanent impairment of capital and a high
probability of an attractive return.
   As a result of the fundamental differences in investing style, value stocks as
identified by Fama/French’s factor investing model may not be attractive at all to
a value investor, as practiced by the disciples of Ben Graham. A fund
constructed using factor investing has nothing to do with Ben Graham’s value
investing system.
   The backbone of Fama/French’s top-down factors model is the assumption
that markets are efficient; therefore, returns that outperform the market can only
be achieved by taking on greater risk. However, when Fama/French looked at the
real returns of investors, they found anomalies. Because they did not want to
abandon the efficient markets hypothesis, Fama/French augmented their
construct with the idea that there must be undiscovered systematic “risk factors.”
Fama/French are now up to five such factors, one of which is the ratio of a
company’s book equity (shareholders’ equity) to market equity (market
capitalization). Thus, “book-to-market” was christened as the “value factor.”
   In contrast to Fama/French’s top-down approach, the Ben Graham value
investing system is based on the premise that to value the stock you must value
the specific business on a bottoms-up basis. The Graham value investor’s goal is
to estimate a company’s future distributable cash flows and buy it when its share
price is trading significantly lower that the intrinsic value implied by these cash
flows. For example, the Graham value investor might estimate that a company’s

[PDF PAGE 146]
long-term cash flows will be $100 million per year and buy it because the
company’s enterprise value is $500 million. It does not take a rocket scientist to
see that if you bought something for $500 million and it returned $100 million
per year, you would be getting a fantastic return on your investment (20 percent,
in this case). The Graham value investing system can outperform the market
over the long term, but only if the investor can do the significant work required
to implement the four Graham value investing principles: (1) value shares like a
proportional interest in a business, (2) have a margin of safety when purchasing
shares, (3) understand Mr. Market is bipolar rather than wise and should be your
servant not your master, and (4) be rational. The fourth principle is the hardest of
all for investors.
   Factor investing does not involve doing any of these things. When someone
uses book-to-market as a ratio to measure the inexpensiveness of a stock, he or
she is effectively saying that there is no difference between a pile of cash in a
bank account and an operating company. To such a person, product, customers,
production capacity, brand, and operating ability mean absolutely nothing. That’s
because book value in the ratio is being used as a proxy for intrinsic value, and
book value tells you nothing about a company’s earnings power.
   Successful Graham value investors view the world in reverse. They are
concerned with what a company’s operating characteristics tell you about that
company’s likely future cash flows. Companies with greater future cash flows
are intrinsically worth more than those with less, regardless of what the book
value of the companies may be.
   The bridge between book value and earnings/cash flow can be found in a
company’s return on equity. That is: Earnings yield = Return on equity × Book
to market.
   Although Fama would concede that the value of a business is its dis-counted
future cash flows, he assumes that no one can be better than average at
discerning how well a company is likely to perform in the future. The
implication in Fama’s framework is that you might as well assume all companies
have the same return on equity. If all companies have the same return on equity,
then book-to-market tells you everything you need to know about a company’s
value. But to the Graham value investor, it is absurd to assume that there is no
basis for conservatively estimating companies’ future returns on equity.
   Graham value investors spend a lot of time thinking about return on equity
and return on capital. These are the concepts that allow them to differentiate the
earnings power of one company versus that of another. To Fama/French, value is
determined strictly by a database screen that sorts based on book value and price.
To a Graham value investor, value is a function of margin of safety, which can be

[PDF PAGE 147]
established only by measuring market price against a range of intrinsic values,
constructed through a conservative estimation of future cash flows.
   Here is a simple way to think about this difference using an analogy. Suppose
you want to put together a basketball team (let’s call it Team A). The
Fama/French approach would be to recruit 100 of the tallest males in town. This
team would do better than average because there is a correlation between height
and ability. In the same way, there is going to be a statistical correlation between
an undervalued company (e.g., a real value investment) and a company with low
book-to-market.
   Another approach to building the team would be to hold tryouts and actually
evaluate everyone’s basketball skills (as a Ben Graham style investor might
evaluate a company). Someone using this style would pick the top fifteen players
for this Team B. Team B is probably going to do better than Team A by a large
margin, even though Team A is better than average. In the same way, a properly
constructed portfolio of value investments is going to be better (by a large
margin) than a portfolio with several hundred stocks with high book-to-market.
   When all is said and done, the factor investing approach is essentially a tweak
(perhaps an enhancement) on index investing. In contrast, the goal of a Graham
value investor is to achieve returns that are significantly higher than a 1 to 2
percent premium. In other words, factor investing is trying to scrape out a slight
statistical edge by tweaking an index fund approach, while the Graham value
investor is seeking more significant returns. The proof of each approach’s
success is “in the doing.” Investors would benefit from reflecting on the results
shared in Warren Buffett’s famous essay “The Superinvestors of Graham and
Doddsville” to appreciate the superior results Graham value investors have
historically achieved.
   Perhaps this is why many funds do their best to encourage confusion about
how Graham value investing differs from factor investing. They want “value”
funds that are really factor investing funds to benefit from the halo of a value
investing system as successfully practiced by the “superinvestors” descended
from the school of Benjamin Graham.
   It is an unfortunate fact that many investors appear to assume that what
Warren Buffett and other Graham value investors are doing is a form of what
Fama talks about when he discusses the value factor. If more investors actually
read Ben Graham’s The Intelligent Investor and other books on Graham value
investing, they would realize that the approaches are fundamentally different.

[PDF PAGE 148]
                                              NOTES



Introduction

 1. Warren Buffett, Working Together, 2010.
 2. Warren Buffett, Tulsa World, 2002.
 3. Warren Buffett, The Snowball, 2008.



              1. The Basics of the Graham Value Investing System
 1. Peter Bevelin, Seeking Wisdom, 2007.
 2. Janet Lowe, Damn Right, 2000.
 3. Outstanding Investor Digest, Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting, 2014.
 4. Seth Klarman, Margin of Safety, 1991.
 5. Seth Klarman, Investor Letter, 2013.
 6. John Bogle, CFA Perspectives, 2014.
 7. Mungerisms, Blogspot, 2005.
 8. Seth Klarman, Margin of Safety, 1991.
 9. Warren Buffet, 1993 Berkshire Shareholder Letter, 1994.
10. Bruce Greenwald, Forbes, 2010.



            2. The Principles of the Graham Value Investing System
 1. Jason Zweig, Intelligent Investor, 2005.
 2. Benjamin Graham, Security Analysis, 1934.
 3. Benjamin Graham, Intelligent Investor, 2003.
 4. Seth Klarman, Margin of Safety, 1991.
 5. John Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, 1997.
 6. Warren Buffett, Brevelin, 2010.
 7. Gabelli, “Value Investing,” 1999.
 8. Benjamin Graham, The Intelligent Investor, 1949.
 9. Ibid.
10. Warren Buffett, The Superinvestors of Graham and Doddsville, 1984.
11. Benjamin Graham, Forbes, 1932.
12. Howard Marks, Oaktree Memo, 2012.
13. Benjamin Graham, Security Analysis, 1934.
14. Warren Buffet, “Buy American,” 2008.

[PDF PAGE 149]
15. Warren Buffett, Fortune, 2001.



                                     3. Worldly Wisdom
 1. Robert Hagstrom, Latticework, 2000.
 2. Philip Tetlock, Long Now, 2007.
 3. Bill Gates, Poor Charlie’s Almanack, 2005.
 4. Warren Buffett, Forbes Magazine, 1996.
 5. Farris Samarrai, “Doing Something Is Better Than Doing Nothing,” 2014.
 6. Warren Buffett, “Working Together,” 2010.
 7. Warren Buffett, 2007 Berkshire Shareholder Letter, 2008.
 8. Whitney Tilson, “Notes from Berkshire Shareholders Meeting,” 2005.
 9. Le, Dang, “Notes from 2008 Meeting with Warren Buffett,” 2008.



                     4. The Psychology of Human Misjudgment
 1. Richard Zeckhauser, “Invest in Unknown,” 2006.
 2. Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow, 2011.
 3. Bruce Greenwald, Interview, 2013.
 4. Peter D. Kaufman, Poor Charlie’s Almanack, 2005.
 5. Martin Kronicle, Interview of Michael Mauboussin, 2010.
 6. Nassim Talbe, Antifragile, 2012.
 7. Mark Twain, Letter, 1887.
 8. Robert Cialdini, Harvard Business Review, 2013.
 9. Michael Schrage, Strategy + Business, 2003.
10. Daniel Kahneman, The Standard, 2014.
11. Daniel Kahneman, New York Times, 2011.
12. Dan Lovallo and Daniel Kahneman, Harvard Business Review, 2003.
13. Chuck Jaffe, Marketwatch, 2012.
14. Daniel Kahneman, Interview with The Australian, 2012.
15. Robert Cialdini, Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion, 1998.
16. Robert Cialdini, Harvard Business Review, 2013.
17. Tim Sullivan, Harvard Business Review, 2011.
18. NPR Staff, NPR, 2013.
19. “WESCO Annual Meeting” in “The Best of Charlie Munger,” 2012.



                                      5. The Right Stuff
 1. Warren Buffett, 1991 Berkshire Shareholder Letter, 1992.
 2. Robert Hagstrom, The Warren Buffet Way, 1997.
 3. Jon Templeton, Templeton, 2008.
 4. Warren Buffett, quoted by Sather, “Berkshire Annual Meeting Recap Part II,” 2008.
 5. Janet Lowe, Damn Right, 2000.
 6. Warren Buffett, 2006 Berkshire Shareholder Letter, 2007.
 7. Seth Klarman, Margin of Safety, 1991.
 8. Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard’s Almanack, 1732.
 9. Ibid, The Way to Wealth, 1732.

[PDF PAGE 150]
        6. The Seven Variables in the Graham Value Investing System
 1. Warren Buffett, 1994 Berkshire Shareholder Letter, 1995.
 2. Michael Price, Graham and Doddsville Newsletter, 2011.
 3. Fred Wilson, Le Web Conference, 2014.
 4. Alice Schroeder, The Snowball, 2008.
 5. Warren Buffet, 1999 Berkshire Shareholder Letter, 2000.
 6. Jason Zweig, “More Stocks May Not Make a Portfolio Safer,” 2009.
 7. Nassim Taleb, Antifragile. 2012.
 8. Warren Buffett, 2012 Berkshire Shareholder Letter, 2013.



                             7. The Right Stuff in a Business
 1. Warren Buffett, 1995 Berkshire Shareholder Letter, 1996.
 2. Alice Schroeder, The Snowball, 2008.
 3. Nassim Taleb, Paper, 2013.
 4. Warren Buffet, “An Owner’s Manual,” 1999.
 5. Michael Porter, Competitive Strategy, 1998.



                                Calculating Intrinsic Value
 1. Warren Buffett, quoted in Tilson, Notes from the Berkshire Annual Meeting, 2003.



                                              Moats
 1. Warren Buffett, Fortune, 2012.
 2. Michael Mauboussin, “Measuring the Moat,” 2013.
 3. Gregory Warren, “Berkshire Hathaway Retains Strong Competitive Advantage,” 2014.
 4. Janet Lowe, Damn Right, 2002.
 5. Warren Buffett, quoted by Merced, Berkshire Shareholder Meeting, 2014.
 6. Warren Buffett, quoted by Bossert, Berkshire Annual Meeting, 2014.
 7. Ben Carlson, A Wealth of Common Sense, 2014.
 8. Howard Marks, The Most Important Thing, 2011.
 9. Warren Buffett, quoted in Warren Buffet Speaks, Janet Lowe, 2007.
10. Joseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, 1942.
11. Michael Mauboussin, The Blog of Michael Covel, 1997.

[PDF PAGE 151]
                                  GLOSSARY


ABSOLUTE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE: the measurement of financial return against a
   benchmark, like a U.S. Treasury bond.
ACTIVE INVESTOR: someone picking stocks and other securities based on research,
   analysis, and their own judgment, rather than buying index funds and
   exchange-traded funds.
ALPHA: a measure of an investment’s performance in relation to a benchmark,
   like an index.
ARBITRAGE: taking advantage of a price difference between two or more markets.
ASSET: something that has value.
ASSET CLASS: A group of assets that exhibit similar characteristics in the market
   (e.g., equities, bonds, and cash equivalents).
BALANCE SHEET: a financial statement that identifies a company’s assets,
   liabilities, and shareholders’ equity.
BERKSHIRE SYSTEM: an investing system that implements choices made by
   Munger and Buffett about variables that supplement Graham value investing.
BETA: a measure of an asset’s volatility in relation to the market.
BOOK VALUE: the value of total assets less the value of total liabilities.
BOOK-TO-MARKET: compares a company’s book value to its share price; book
   equity (shareholders’ equity) to market equity (market capitalization).
BOTTOM-UP: taking fundamental/micro data and building it up, trying to
   understand more macro phenomena.
CIGAR-BUTT STOCK: a stock bought at a sufficiently low price that you should be
   able to sell it at a decent profit, even though the long-term performance of the
   business is terrible. The cigar-butt metaphor comes from the idea that the
   stock can be bought and the value comes from the fact that there are still a
   few puffs left in it.
CIRCLE OF COMPETENCE: the perimeter of the area within which a person has
   superior knowledge and expertise over the market.
CONSUMER SURPLUS: the difference between what a consumer was willing to pay
   and what they actually pay.
CONTRARIAN INVESTING: investing in companies that most other investors believe
   will not increase in value (i.e., not following the crowd).

[PDF PAGE 152]
CORRELATION: how asset prices move in relation to each other.
DEPRECIATION: an accounting allocation of the cost of a long-lived asset over its
   useful life.
DERIVATIVES: securities that derive their value from other securities.
DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW (DCF): discounting at an appropriate interest rate the net
   cash flows from an investment.
DIVERSIFICATION: buying a number of different uncorrelated assets.
DOWNSIDE: a potential loss.
EARNINGS PER SHARE (EPS): measure of profitability calculated by dividing net
   income by the number of shares of stock.
EBIT: earnings before interest and taxes.
EBITDA: earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization; Munger
   suggests inserting the words “bullshit earnings” instead when the term is
   seen.
ECONOMIES OF SCALE: average costs decrease as output increases.
EFFICIENT MARKET HYPOTHESIS: at any given time, security prices fully reflect all
   available information (weak, semi-strong, and strong variants exist).
EQUITY: a share of company ownership.
EXTRAPOLATION: making predictions about the future based on trends from the
   past plus present data.
FACTOR INVESTING: an approach to investing developed by Fama/French, which
   has identified factors that can be used to improve index funds.
FOCUS INVESTING: an approach to investing that “implies 10 holdings, not 100 or
   400,” according to Munger.
FREE CASH FLOW: cash available after expenses, debt service, capital
   expenditures, and dividends are taken into account.
FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS: an analysis of performance data reported by the
   company itself in documents like annual reports, earnings announcements,
   and U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filings.
GAAP: generally accepted accounting principles.
GRAHAM VALUE INVESTING: a type of value investing based on four fundamental
   principles.
GROWTH STOCK: according to Howard Marks, these are stocks (even those whose
   current value is low relative to their current price) with values that investors
   believe will grow quickly enough in the future to produce substantial
   appreciation.
HEDGE: the purchase of an asset intended to deliver an inverse return to another
   asset to offset the impact of price changes.
HEURISTICS: a mental shortcut that enables people to solve problems and make

[PDF PAGE 153]
   judgments quickly (mental rules of thumb).
HOLDUP PROBLEM: when an exclusive supplier (or buyer) uses that relationship to
   raise prices and extract profits from the buyer (or seller).
INCOME STATEMENT: a document identifying the profit or loss of a company.
INDEX INVESTOR: investing in a diversified portfolio of index funds and exchange-
   traded funds.
INTRINSIC VALUE: the present value of future cash flows.
INVESTMENT: the purchase of an asset in order to generate a return.
INVESTOR: someone trying to understand the underlying value of an asset.
LATTICEWORK OF MODELS: assembling many big models from many disciplines
   into an interrelated structure that resembles a lattice to make better decisions.
LEVERAGE: debt or borrowing as a share of a company’s total funding.
LIQUIDATION VALUE: the amount of cash and assets that could be obtained
   breaking up the company, selling its assets, repaying its debt, and distributing
   everything that remains to shareholders.
LIQUIDITY: a measure of how easy it is to sell an asset for cash.
LONG: To buy something based on a prediction its price will go up.
MACROECONOMICS: the study of the aggregate behavior of an economy.
MARGIN OF SAFETY: the difference between the intrinsic value and the current
   market price.
MENTAL MODELS: working cognitive representations of phenomena with which
   people interact.
MICROECONOMICS: the study of individual elements that make up an economy.
MOAT: barriers to market entry that enable sustainable value creation by a
   business.
MOMENTUM INVESTING: investing based on a thesis that perceived trends in a
   variable, like prices, are more likely to continue than change direction.
MR. MARKET: a metaphor for the unpredictably bipolar nature of markets in the
   short term; sometimes in the short term, it will sell an asset at a bargain price
   and sometimes pay more than the asset is worth.
NET-NET STOCK: shares of stock that are traded at a discount to liquidation value.
NET PRESENT VALUE: the present value of the cash flows from the investment less
   the cost of the investment.
NETWORK EFFECTS: demand-side economies of scale.
OPPORTUNITY COST: the value of the foregone alternative.
OWNER’S EARNINGS: net income + depreciation + depletion + amortization –
   capital expenditure – additional working capital.
PASSIVE INVESTOR: investing in a diversified portfolio of index funds and
   exchange-traded funds.

[PDF PAGE 154]
PRESENT VALUE: amount of cash today that is equivalent in value to a payment(s)
   that will be received in the future.
PRIVATE MARKET VALUE: the price that a well-informed and experienced
   businessperson would pay for a business in a private transaction.
PRODUCER SURPLUS: difference between the amount a producer of a good or
   service is paid and the costs to supply that good or service.
REAL RETURN: investment return after being adjusted for the impact of inflation.
RELATIVE RETURN: the financial return when compared to a benchmark over a
   period of time.
RETURN ON CAPITAL: measures the return earned on capital invested in an
   investment.
RETURN ON EQUITY: net income generated as a percentage of shareholders’ equity.
REVERSION TO THE MEAN: the tendency for later observations of random variables
   to be closer to their mean than current observations.
RISK: the possibility of suffering a loss.
SECURITY: debt or equity instrument issued by a private firm or government.
SHORT: the sale of a borrowed security based on a prediction that the price will
   drop.
SPECULATOR: someone trying to guess the price of an asset in the future by
   guessing what the behavior of others will be in the future.
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: analyzing prices by using market-generated data, such as
   earnings ratios, volatility, price history, price patterns, and trading volume in
   order to time the direction of markets.
TOP-DOWN: taking big picture data and trying to use that data to understand more
   micro fundamentals and to choose specific investments.
TREASURY BILLS: obligations of the U.S. government sold at a discount to face
   value with a term of one year or less.
TREASURY BONDS: obligations of the U.S. government with a term of ten years or
   more, which pay interest on the principal amount.
TREASURY NOTES: obligations of the U.S. government with a term of one to ten
   years, which pay interest on the principal amount.
TREASURY YIELD: the percentage return on investment on the debt obligations of
   the U.S. government.
UPSIDE: a potential gain.
VALUE: the worth of something calculated by using fundamental analysis.
VALUE INVESTING: acquiring more than you are paying for (common to all
   intelligent investing).
VALUE STOCK: a term different people with different investment styles use for
   different purposes; factor investors have one definition and Graham value

[PDF PAGE 155]
   investors have another definition.
VOLATILITY: fluctuation of a variable such as a market price over time.
WORLDLY WISDOM: the routine use via synthesis of the big ideas in each of the big
   disciplines in making decisions.
YIELD: the income earned on an investment or a specific period.

[PDF PAGE 156]
                                      BIBLIOGRAPHY


                                          Video Sources

“21st Annual Conference: Roundtable III.” YouTube video, 1:11:36, from a panel discussion on China at
   the 21st Annual Conference, posted by “committee100,” June 3, 2013, http://www.youtube.com/watch?
   v=cDDPtJzGyEg.
“A Conversation with Charlie Munger U Michigan 2010 part 9.” YouTube video, 10:24, from a talk at
   University of Michigan in 2010, posted by “investingtipsadvice,” July 13, 2012,
   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u1RNpToWVpQ.
“Charlie Munger on BYD.” YouTube video, 8:02, from an interview on Fox Television, posted by “Value
   Investing Pro,” May 19, 2009, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rZ9AooeFe9E.
“Charlie Munger Reveals Secrets to Getting Rich.” YouTube video, 10:56, from a BBC interview, posted by
   “CharlieMungerChannel,” July 13, 2012, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3WkpQ4PpId4.
“Charlie Munger Speech at USC—May 2007 (part 1 of 5).” YouTube video, 8:45, from a speech at USC
   Law School’s Commencement in May 2007, posted by “Tri Suseno,” August 9, 2009.
   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L6Cy7UwsRPQ.
“Munger on Sokol: ‘I’m Sad.’” YouTube video, 6:27, from an interview with CNN, posted by
   “CNNMoney,” May 3, 2011, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=72t7oapvbas.
“The Psychology of Human Misjudgment.” YouTube video, 1:16:22, from a speech given at Harvard
   University in June 1995, posted by “BuffettMungerWisdom,” January 13, 2013,
   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pqzcCfUglws.



                                           Text Sources

Ablan, Jennifer and Jonathan Stempel. “Munger: Hard to Find Berkshire Deals, ‘Raving Mad’ Not to Try.”
    Reuters, May 3, 2013. http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/05/03/us-berkshire-agm-munger-
    idUSBRE9420PM20130503.
Ariely, Dan. Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions. New York: Harper,
    2010.
Barbosa, Miguel. “Interview with Michael Mauboussin.” Seeking Alpha. September, 2009.
    http://m.seekingalpha.com/article/163743.
Berkowitz, Bruce. “Interview at University of Miami.” Market Folly. November 30, 2012.
    http://www.marketfolly.com/2012/11/bruce-berkowitz-interview-at-university.html.
Bernstein, Peter. Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 1998.
Bernstein, William. The Investor’s Manifesto. New York: Wiley, 2012.
Betterment. “Why a Value Investor Is Better Off in a Portfolio.” Interview of Bruce Greenwald. April 12,
    2013. https://www.betterment.com/blog/2013/12/04/why-a-value-investor-is-better-off-in-a-portfolio.
Bevelin, Peter. Seeking Wisdom: From Darwin to Munger. Marceline, MO: Walsworth, 2008.
Bogle, John. “The Arithmetic of ‘All-In’ Investment Expenses. CFA Perspectives.” Financial Accountants
    Journal, Vol. 70 (1), 2014. http://www.cfapubs.org/doi/sum/10.2469/faj.v70.n1.1
Bogle, John. Clash of Cultures. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2012.

[PDF PAGE 157]
Bogle, John. Common Sense on Mutual Funds: New Imperatives for the Intelligent Investor. Hoboken, NJ:
   Wiley, 1999.
Bogle, John. John Bogle on Investing: The First 50 Years. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000.
Bogle, John. The Little Book of Common Sense Investing: The Only Way to Guarantee Your Fair Share of
   Stock Market Returns (Little Book Big Profits). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2007.
Boodell, Peter. “2008 Berkshire Hathaway Shareholder Meeting.” Seeking Alpha, May 5, 2008.
   http://seekingalpha.com/article/75598-2008-berkshirehathaway-shareholder-meeting-detailed-notes.
Boodell, Peter. “Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Notes.” Rational Walk, May 3, 2010.
   http://www.rationalwalk.com/?p=6794.
Boodell,      Peter.      “Wesco        2008      Annual       Meeting      Notes.”    August     2009.
   http://mungerisms.blogspot.com/2009/08/2008-annual-meeting-notes.html.
Boodell,     Peter.     “Wesco       Annual      Meeting.”      Seeking    Alpha,    May      9,  2008.
   http://seekingalpha.com/article/76538-2008-wesco-shareholder-meeting-detailed-notes.
Bossert,       Alex.        2014        Berkshire       Hathaway         Annual      Meeting,     2014.
   http://www.scribd.com/doc/222892108/2014-Berkshire-Hathaway-Annual-Meeting#scribd.
Browne, Christopher. The Little Book of Value Investing. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2006.
Bruck,       Connie.       “Rough        Rider.”      New        Yorker,    November       12,    2007.
   http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2007/11/12/071112fa_fact_bruck.
Bruni, Jerome V. “2004 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Top 20 Questions.” J.V. Bruni and Company
   Website, 2004. http://jvbruni.com/berkshire.htm.
Bruni, Jerome V. “2005 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Top 20 Questions.” J.V. Bruni and Company
   Website, 2005. http://www.jvbruni.com/Berkshire2005annualmeeting.htm.
Bruni, Jerome V. “2006 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Top 20 Questions.” J.V. Bruni and Company
   Website, 2006. http://jvbruni.com/Berkshire2006annualmeeting.htm.
Bruni, Jerome V. “2007 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Top 20 Questions.” J.V. Bruni and Company
   Website, 2007. http://www.jvbruni.com/Berkshire2007annualmeeting.htm.
Buffett, Warren. 1981 Berkshire Hathaway Shareholder Letter, February 26, 1982.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1981.html.
Buffett, Warren. 1987 Berkshire Hathaway Shareholder Letter, February 29, 1988.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1987.html.
Buffett,    Warren.    1989      Berkshire     Hathaway     Shareholder    Letter,   March     2, 1990.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1989.html.
Buffett, Warren. 1991 Berkshire Hathaway Shareholder Letter, February 28, 1992.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1991.html.
Buffett,    Warren.    1992      Berkshire     Hathaway     Shareholder    Letter,   March     1, 1993.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1992.html.
Buffett,    Warren.    1993      Berkshire     Hathaway     Shareholder    Letter,   March     1, 1994.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1993.html.
Buffett,    Warren.    1994      Berkshire     Hathaway     Shareholder    Letter,   March     7, 1995.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1994.html.
Buffett,    Warren.    1995      Berkshire     Hathaway     Shareholder    Letter,   March     1, 1996.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1995.html.
Buffett,    Warren.    1999      Berkshire     Hathaway     Shareholder    Letter,   March     1, 2000.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1999htm.html.
Buffett,    Warren.     2007      Berkshire     Hathaway      Shareholder    Letter,  February,   2008.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/2007ltr.pdf.
Buffett,    Warren.    2012      Berkshire     Hathaway     Shareholder    Letter,   March     1, 2013.
   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/2012ltr.pdf.
Buffett, Warren. “Benjamin Graham 1894–1976.” Financial Analysts Journal, November/December, 1976
   Vol. 32, No. 6: 19. http://dx.doi.org/10.2469/faj.v32.n6.19.
Buffett, Warren. Berkshire Hathaway Website. www.berkshirehathaway.com.
Buffett, Warren. “Buy American. I am.” New York Times, October 16, 2008.

[PDF PAGE 158]
    http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/17/opinion/17buffett.html.
Buffett, Warren. “Investing in Equity Markets.” Transcript of a seminar. Columbia University Business
    School, March 13, 1985.
Buffett, Warren. Letter to Partners. May 29, 1969.
Buffett, Warren. Letter to Partners. October 9, 1967.
Buffett, Warren. Letter to the Editor. Forbes. October 7, 1996.
Buffet,      Warren.       “An    Owner’s      Manual.”      Berkshire   Hathaway,      January   1999.
    http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/owners.html.
Buffett, Warren. The Superinvestors of Grahamand-Doddsville. Transcript of a Speech Given at Columbia
    University, 1984.
Buffett, Warren. “What We Can Learn from Philip Fisher.” Forbes. October 19, 1987.
Buffett, Warren, Walter Schloss, and Irving Kahn. A Tribute to Benjamin Graham. Outstanding Investor
    Digest. May 5, 1995.
Buffett, Warren Jr. [pseud]. “Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Report.” The Motley Fool, May 7, 2007.
    https://www.fool.com/community/pod/2007/070507.htm.
Buhayar, Noah. “Berkshire Hathaway’s Charlie Munger Shows a Golden Touch.” Business Week, July 25,
    2013.
Bvalue. “Berkshire Meeting Notes.” The Motley Fool, April 28, 2001.
Carlson, Ben. “Buffett in the Down Years.” A Wealth of Common Sense, 2014.
    http://awealthofcommonsense.com/buffett-years.
Calvey, Mark. “Friendly Investment Advice from Warren Buffet’s Buddy.” San Francisco Business
    Journal,                            October                        20,                        1996.
    http://www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/stories/1996/10/21/newscolumn6.html.
Carnegie, Dale. How to Win Friends and Influence People. New York: Pocket Books. Originally published
    1937.
Chien, Yi Li. “Chasing Returns Has a High Cost for Investors.” St. Louis Fed, April 14, 2014.
    http://www.stlouisfed.org/on-the-economy/chasing-returns-has-a-high-cost-for-investors.
Cialdini, Robert. Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. New York: HarperCollins, 1998.
Claremon, Ben. “2009 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Notes.” The Inoculated Investor, May 5, 2009.
    http://inoculatedinvestor.blogspot.com/2009/05/2009-berkshire-hathway-annual-meeting.html.
Claremon, Ben. “2010 Wesco Annual Meeting Notes.” Street Capitalist, May 7, 2010.
    http://streetcapitalist.com/2010/05/07/charlie-mungers-2010-wesco-annualmeeting.
Claremon, Ben. “Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Notes 2010: Thoughts from Warren Buffett &
    Charlie Munger.” Market Folly, May 5, 2010. http://www.marketfolly.com/2010/05/berkshirehathaway-
    annualmeeting-notes.html.
Claremon, Ben. “Comprehensive 2011 Berkshire Meeting Notes.” The Inoculated Investor, May 2, 2011.
    http://inoculatedinvestor.blogspot.com/2011/05/comprehensive-2011-berkshire-meeting.html.
Claremon, Ben. “Notes from the Final Conversation with Charlie Munger.” The Inoculated Investor, July 4,
    2011. http://inoculatedinvestor.blogspot.com/2011/07/notes-from-final-conversation-with.html.
Cliffe, Sarah. “The Uses (and Abuses) of Influence.” Harvard Business Review, July-August 2013.
    http://hbr.org/2013/07/theuses-and-abuses-of-influence/ar/1
Cramden, Ralph. “Wesco AGM.” The Motley Fool, May 6, 2010. http://boards.fool.com/wesco-agm-
    28494646.aspx?sort=postdate.
Crippen, Alex. “Charlie Munger Blasts Bankers and High-Frequency Trading.” CNBC video, 37:00. May 3,
    2013. http://www.cnbc.com/id/100707283.
Crippen, Alex. “CNBC: Notes from 1998 Berkshire Meeting.” Everything Warren Buffett, May 2, 2008.
    http://everythingwarrenbuffett.blogspot.com/2008/05/cnbc-notes-from-1998-berkshire-meeting.html.
Crippen, Alex. “CNBC Transcript: Warren Buffett, Charlie Munger and Bill Gates,” CNBC, May 5, 2014.
    http://www.cnbc.com/id/101642613.
Crippen, Alex. “Live Blog Archive: Warren Buffett News Conference.” CNBC, May 4, 2008.
    http://www.cnbc.com/id/24454708.
Cunningham, Lawrence A. The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Corporate America by Warren E.

[PDF PAGE 159]
    Buffett. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2008.
Daily           Journal          to       Justin        Dobbie,         March           18,       2014.
    http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/783412/000143774913003140/filename1.htm.
Dorsey, Pat. “Ideas That Will Make You Money.” Graham and Doddsville, May 17, 2006.
    http://www.grahamanddoddsville.net/wordpress/Files/Gurus/Charlie%20Munger/Ideas%20That%20Will%20Make%20Y
    %20Morningstar%20-%205-17-06.pdf.
Eisner, Michael and Aaron Cohen. Working Together: Why Great Partnerships Succeed. New York:
    HarperCollins, 2010.
Ellis, Charles D. and James R. Verton. Classics: An Investor’s Anthology. New York: Dow Jones-Irwin,
    1989.
Fernandes, Daniel, John Lynch, and Richard Netemeyer. “Financial Literacy, Financial Education and
    Downstream         Financial    Behaviors.”     Management      Science,     January     6,   2014.
    http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2333898#.
Finkelstein, Daniel. “Interview with Daniel Kahneman.” The Australian, June 2012.
Fisher, Philip A. Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2001.
Fisher, Philip A. Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits, Paths to Wealth through Common Stocks,
    Conservative Investors Sleep Well, and Developing an Investment Philosophy. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley,
    2012.
Franklin, Benjamin. Poor Richards Almanack. 1758.
Franklin, Benjamin. The Way to Wealth. 1758.
Funk, Josh. “Buffett’s #2 Man Helps From the Background.” USA Today, May 17, 2008.
    http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/markets/2008-05-17-berkshire-munger_N.htm.
Gabelli. “Value Investing—U.S.” December 30, 1999. http://www.gabelli.com/news/articles/reg-
    selby_123099.html.
Gawande, Atul. The Checklist Manifesto. New York: Picador, 2011
Gdefelice. “WESCO Meeting Notes.” The Motley Fool, May 9, 2002. http://boards.fool.com/wesco-
    meeting-notes-17195126.aspx.
Godwin, Richard. “The Thought Father: Nobel PrizeWinning Psychologist Daniel Kahneman on Luck.”
    The Standard, March 18, 2014. http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/london-life/the-thought-father-
    nobel-prizewinning-psychologist-daniel-kahneman-on-luck-9199162.html.
Gongol, Brian. “Notes from the 2012 Berkshire Hathaway Shareholder’s Meeting.” Gongol.com, May 7,
    2012. http://www.gongol.com/research/berkshire/2012.
Graham, Benjamin. The Intelligent Investor (Revised edition). New York: HarperCollins, 2003.
Graham, Benjamin. The Memoirs of the Dean of Wall Street. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
Graham, Benjamin, Davis Dodd, Sidney Cottle, and Charles Tatham. Security Analysis. New York:
    McGraw-Hill, 1962.
Greenwald, Bruce C.N., Judd Kahn, Paul D. Sonkin, and Michael van Biema. Value Investing, from
    Graham to Buffett and Beyond. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2001.
Grundfest, Joseph. “Interview with Charles Munger.” Manual of Ideas, Spring 2009.
    http://www.manualofideas.com/files/content/200905_munger.pdf.
Grundfest, Joseph. “Interview with Charles Munger.” Stanford Lawyer, May 14, 2009.
    http://www.calculatedriskblog.com/2009/05/interview-with-charlie-munger.html.
Hagstrom, Robert G. Investing: The Last Liberal Art. Cheshire, UK: Texere, 2000.
Hagstrom, Robert G. Latticework: The News Investing. Cheshire, UK: Texere, 2000.
Hagstrom, Robert G. The Warren Buffett Portfolio: Mastering the Power of the Focused Investment
    Strategy. New York: Wiley, 1999.
Hagstrom, Robert G. The Warren Buffett Way. New York: Wiley, 1997.
Henderson, Nicholas. “Wesco Annual Meeting—The Charlie Munger Show.” Gurufocus, May 15, 2008.
    http://www.gurufocus.com/news/27308/the-wesco-annualmeeting—the-charlie-munger-show.
Housel, Morgan. “I’m Just Now Realizing How Stupid We Are.” The Motley Fool, June 14, 2014.
    http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/06/11/im-just-now-realizing-how-stupid-we-are.aspx.
Huey,       John.       “The      World’s     Best     Brand.”     Fortune,       May       31,    1993.

[PDF PAGE 160]
    http://management.fortune.cnn.com/2012/11/21/buffett-coke-brand/.
The Investments Blog. “Final Wesco Meeting: A Morning with Charlie Munger.”
The Investments Blog, July 4, 2011. http://theinvestmentsblog.blogspot.com/2011/07/final-wesco-meeting-
    morning-with.html.
Irwin, Neal. “After Buffett, Should Berkshire Hathaway Be Broken Up?” New York Times, May 5, 2014.
    http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/06/upshot/should-berkshire-hathaway-be-broken-up.html.
Jaffe, Chuck. “Commentary: Superior Beliefs Bring Inferior Results.” Marketwatch, May 18, 2012.
    http://www.marketwatch.com/story/how-investors-think-their-way-into-trouble-2012-05-18.
Kahn, Irving, and Robert Milne. Benjamin Graham: The Father of Financial Analysis. Charlottesville, VA:
    Financial Analysts Research Foundation, 1977.
Kahneman, Daniel. “Don’t Blink! The Hazards of Confidence.” New York Times, October 19, 2011.
Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011.
Kass, David. “Notes from 2012 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting.” Warren Buffett Blog, Robert H.
    Smith School of Business, June 4, 2012. http://blogs.rhsmith.umd.edu/davidkass/uncategorized/notes-
    from-2012-berkshire-hathaway-annual-meeting.
Kass, David. “Notes from 2013 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting.” Warren Buffett Blog, Robert H.
    Smith School of Business, May 31, 2013. http://blogs.rhsmith.umd.edu/davidkass/uncategorized/notes-
    from-2013-berkshire-hathaway-annual-meeting.
Kass, David. “Notes from Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting—April 30, 2011.” Warren Buffett Blog,
    Robert         H.        Smith     School        of       Business,       June       26,        2011.
    http://blogs.rhsmith.umd.edu/davidkass/uncategorized/berkshirehathaway-annualmeeting-april-30-
    2011.
Kass, David. “Warren Buffett’s Meeting with University of Maryland MBA Students—November 15,
    2013.” Warren Buffet Blog, Robert H. Smith School of Business, December 8, 2013.
    http://blogs.rhsmith.umd.edu/davidkass/uncategorized/warrenbuffetts-meeting-with-university-of-
    maryland-mbams-students-november-15-2013.
Kass, Peter. The Book of Investing Wisdom: Classic Writings by Great Stock-Pickers and Legends of Wall
    Street. New York: Wiley, 1999.
Kaufman, Peter D. Poor Charlie’s Almanack: The Wit and Wisdom of Charles T. Munger. Virginia Beach,
    VA: Donning, 2005.
Kelley,      Margie.     “In     the   Money.”      Harvard      Law     Bulletin,    Summer        2001.
    http://www.law.harvard.edu/news/bulletin/2001/summer/feature_1-1.html.
Keynes, John Maynard. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. Amherst, NY:
    Prometheus Books, 1997.
Klarman, Seth. Margin of Safety. New York: Harper, 1991.
Korada, Srinivas. “Notes from WESCO’s Annual Meeting.” Gurufocus, May 8, 2009.
    http://www.gurufocus.com/news/55358/notes-from-wescos-annual-meeting
Kronicle, Martin. “Think Twice Michael Mauboussin Interview.” Martinkronicle, 2010.
    http://www.martinkronicle.com/2010/05/04/think-twice-michael-mauboussin-interview/.
Kupfer,       Andrew.        “Gates     on       Buffett.”     Fortune,      February      6,       1996.
    http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/1996/02/05/207334/index.htm.
LaFon, Holly. “Buffett and Munger Annual Meeting 2013 Q&A.” The Motley Fool, May 8, 2013.
    http://www.marketfolly.com/2013/02/notes-from-charlie-mungers-daily.html.
LaFon, Holly. “Buffett and Munger Annual Meeting 2013 Q&A.” Gurufocus, May 8, 2013.
    http://www.gurufocus.com/news/218379/buffett-and-munger-annual-meeting-2013-qa-complete.
Le, Dang. “Notes from 2008 Meeting with Warren Buffett.” Underground Value, February 23, 2008.
    http://undergroundvalue.blogspot.com/2008/02/notes-from-buffett-meeting-2152008_23.html.
Lefevre, Edwin. Reminisces of a Stock Operator. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2006.
Lenzer, Robert. “The Unadulterated Wit and Wisdom of Charlie Munger.” Forbes, May 12, 2010.
    http://www.forbes.com/2010/05/12/charlie-munger-warrenbuffett-markets-streettalk-
    berkshirehathaway.html.
Loomis, Carol. “Warren Buffett on the Stock Market.” Fortune, December 10, 2001.

[PDF PAGE 161]
    http://www.tilsonfunds.com/BuffettStockMarket.pdf.
Lovallo, Dan and Daniel Kahneman. “Delusions of Success: How Optimism Undermines Executives’
    Decisions.” Harvard Business Review, July 2003. https://hbr.org/2003/07/delusions-of-success-how-
    optimism-undermines-executives-decisions.
Lowe, Janet. Benjamin Graham on Value Investing: Lessons from the Dean of Wall Street. New York:
    Penguin, 1994.
Lowe, Janet. Damn Right: Behind the Scenes with Berkshire Hathaway Billionaire: Charlie Munger.
    Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2000.
Lowe, Janet. The Rediscovered Benjamin Graham. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 1999.
Lowe, Janet. Value Investing Made Easy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
Lowe, Janet. Warren Buffet Speaks: Wit and Wisdom from the World’s Greatest Investor. Hoboken, NJ:
    Wiley, 2007.
Lowenstein, Roger. Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York: Random House, 1997.
Lowenstein, Roger. When Genius Failed. New York: Random House, 2000.
Lu, Li. “My Teacher: Charlie Munger.” China Entrepreneur, May 21, 2010.
Lynch, Peter. Beating the Street. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994.
Lynch, Peter. On up on Wall Street. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2000.
Mackay, Harvey. “The Oracle of Omaha Speaks.” Tulsa World, July 7, 2002.
Mackintosh, James. “FT Long Short.” Financial Times, February 14, 2013. http://blogs.ft.com/ft-long-
    short/2013/02/14/be-like-buffett.
Majmudar, Kaushal B. “Warren Buffett’s Wisdom on Investing, on Markets, and on Life.” Gurufocus, May
    21, 2006. http://www.gurufocus.com/news/1636/warrenbuffetts-wisdom-on-investing-on-markets-and-
    on-life.
Malkiel, Burton. A Random Walk Down Wall Street. New York: W.W. Norton, 1985.
Mandelbrot, Benoit. The Misbehavior of Markets. New York: Basic Books, 2004.
Maranjian, Selena. “Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Notes.” The Motley Fool, May 7, 2002.
    http://boards.fool.com/press-conference-part-1-12517974.aspx.
Maranjian, Selena. “Berkshire Hathaway Press Conference Notes.” The Motley Fool, May 7, 2002.
    http://boards.fool.com/berkshirehathaway-press-conference-notes-17180279.aspx 2002.
Maranjian, Selena. “Berkshire Hathaway’s Other Half.” The Motley Fool, January 9, 2001.
    http://www.fool.com/specials/2001/sp010109.htm.
Maranjian, Selena. “Press Conference.” The Motley Fool, May 4, 2000. http://boards.fool.com/press-
    conference-part-1-12517974.aspx.
Marks, Howard. Oaktree Capital Memo. Oaktree Capital Management, June 20, 2012.
Marks, Howard. Oaktree Capital Memo. Oaktree Capital Management, July 16, 2014.
Marks, Howard. The Most Important Thing: Uncommon Sense for the Thoughtful Investor. New York:
    Columbia Business School Publishing, 2011.
Martin,     Michael.      “Think    Twice.”     Michael    Mauboussin   Interview,   May     4, 2010.
    http://www.martinkronicle.com/2010/05/04/think-twice-michael-mauboussin-interview.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Are You an Expert?” The Blog of Michael Covel. October 28, 2005.
    www.capatcolumbia.com/…/Are%20You%20an%20Expert.pdf.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Aver and Aversion.” The Blog of Michael Covel. January 6, 2006.
    http://www.michaelcovel.com/2006/01/06/aver-and-aversion.
Mauboussin,        Michael.    “The    Babe     Ruth    Effect.”  The   Consilient    Observer, 2002.
    http://turtletrader.com/pdfs/babe-ruth.pdf.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Big Think Interview with Michael Mauboussin.” May 14, 2010.
    http://bigthink.com/videos/bigthink-interview-with-michael-mauboussin.
Mauboussin,        Michael.    “Blaming     the   Rat.”    The   Blog   of    Michael    Covel, 2011.
    http://michaelcovel.com/pdfs/BlamingtheRat.pdf.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Capital Ideas Revisited.” The Blog of Michael Covel, March 30, 2005.
    http://turtletrader.com/pdfs/CapitalIdeasRevisited03_30_05.pdf.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Embracing Complexity.” Harvard Business Review, September 2011.

[PDF PAGE 162]
   http://hbr.org/2011/09/embracing-complexity/ar/1.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Explaining the Wisdom of Crowds.” The Blog of Michael Covel, 2007.
   http://www.capatcolumbia.com/Articles/ExplainingtheWisdomofCrowds.pdf.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Frontiers of Finance.” The Blog of Michael Covel, 1997.
   http://people.stern.nyu.edu/adamodar/pdfiles/eqnotes/cap.pdf.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Frontiers of Strategy.” The Blog of Michael Covel, 1998.
   http://www.capatcolumbia.com/Articles/FoStrategy/Fos1.pdf.
Mauboussin,       Michael.      “Get      Real.”     The    Blog     of      Michael     Covel,     1999.
   http://www.capatcolumbia.com/Articles/FoFinance/Fof10.pdf.
Mauboussin, Michael. “An Interview with Behavioral Investing Expert Michael Mauboussin.” Matt
   Koppenheffer, March 1, 2014. http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/03/01/an-interview-with-
   behavioral-investing-expertmich.aspx.
Mauboussin,        Michael.      “Interview       with     Michael      Mauboussin.”       Big     Think.
   http://bigthink.com/videos/bigthink-interview-with-michael-mauboussin (no date given, but “over four
   years ago”).
Mauboussin, Michael. “Is Your Manager Skillful or Just Lucky?” Wall Street Journal, November 2, 2012.
   http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10000872396390444734804578062890110146284.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Measuring the Moat: Assessing the Magnitude and Sustainability of Value
   Creation.”      Credit     Suisse,    December      16,     2002.    http://www.safalniveshak.com/wp-
   content/uploads/2012/07/Measuring-The-Moat-CSFB.pdf.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Michael Mauboussin on the Santa Fe Institute and Complex Adaptive Systems.”
   Compounding              My          Interests        Blog,        November            7,        2013.
   http://compoundingmyinterests.com/compounding-the-blog/2013/11/7/michael-mauboussin-on-the-
   santa-fe-institute-and-complex-ada.html.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Steve Forbes Interview: Michael Mauboussin, Professor and Investor.” Forbes, July
   11,       2011.      http://www.forbes.com/sites/steveforbes/2011/07/11/steveforbes-interview-michael-
   mauboussin-professor-and-investor/.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Valuation.” 2002. http://www.capatcolumbia.com/Articles/Valuation%20-
   %20Mauboussin.pdf.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Mauboussin on the ‘Success Equation.’” Knowledge@Wharton, March 6, 2013.
   http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/michael-mauboussin-on-the-success-equation.
Mauboussin, Michael. More Than You Know: Finding Financial Wisdom in Unconventional Places. New
   York: Columbia University Press, 2006.
Mauboussin, Michael. The Success Equation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2012.
Mauboussin, Michael. Think Twice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press, 2009.
Mauboussin, Michael. “Untangling Skill and Luck.” Harvard Business Review. February 7, 2011.
   http://blogs.hbr.org/2011/02/untangling-skill-and-luck.
Mauboussin, Michael, and Paul Johnson. “Competitive Advantage Period ‘CAP’: The Neglected Value
   Driver.” January 14, 1997. http://people.stern.nyu.edu/adamodar/pdfiles/eqnotes/cap.pdf.
Merced, Michael J. “Berkshire Hathaway’s 2014 Shareholder Meeting.” New York Times, May 3, 2014.
   http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/05/03/live-blog-berkshirehathaways-2014-shareholder-meeting/?
   _r=2.
Montgomery, Cynthia and Michael Porter. Strategy: Seeking and Securing Competitive Advantage.
   Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press, 1979.
Montier, James. Darwin’s Mind: The Evolutionary Foundations of Heuristics and Biases. Rochester, NY:
   Social Science Research Network, 2002.
Montier, James. “The Golden Rules of Investing.” GMO Letter, December 2013.
Montier, James. “Only White Swans on the Way to Revulsion.” Q Finance, November 2009.
   http://www.qfinance.com/capital-markets-viewpoints/only-white-swans-on-the-road-to-revulsion.
Montier, James. “The Seven Immutable Laws of Investing.” The Big Picture 2011.
   http://www.ritholtz.com/blog/2011/03/the-seven-immutable-laws-of-investing/.
Munger, Charles. “Academic Economics: Strengths and Faults after Considering Interdisciplinary Needs.”

[PDF PAGE 163]
    Speech,        University     of      California,     Santa     Barbara,      October      3,  2003.
    http://www.rbcpa.com/Munger_UCSBspeech.pdf.
Munger, Charles. Charles Munger Resignation letter from the U.S. League of Savings Institution, May 30,
    1989. http://boards.fool.com/charlie-munger-long-13640415.aspx.
Munger, Charles. “Commencement Speech at Harvard School.” Speech, Boston, MA, June 13, 1986.
    http://biznewz.com/charlie-mungers-speech-to-the-harvard-school-june-1986.
Munger, Charles. “Dubridge Lecture.” Speech, California Institute of Technology, March 2008.
    http://www.voicebase.com/voice_file/public_detail/235138.
Munger, Charles. “How We Can Restore Market Confidence.” Washington Post, November 2, 2009.
    http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2009-02-11/opinions/36831107_1_booms-investment-banks-
    financial-system.
Munger, Charles. “Investment Practices of Leading Charitable Foundations. Foundation Financial Officers
    Group.”          Speech,         Santa        Monica,       CA,          October       14,     1998.
    http://www.tiffeducationfoundation.org/SRIdocuments/Charlie_Munger_on_Institutional_Funds_Management.pdf
Munger, Charles. “A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom as It Relates to Investment Management &
    Business.” Speech, University of Southern California Marshall School of Business, April 14, 1994.
    http://old.ycombinator.com/munger.html.
Munger, Charles. “A Lesson in Elementary, Worldly Wisdom, Revisited.” Speech, Stanford Law School,
    April 19, 1996. http://www.scribd.com/doc/86728974/3-Lesson-in-Elementary-Worldy-Wisdom-
    Revisited-1996.
Munger,          Charles.       “Master’s        Class.”       Philanthropy,       March/April     1999.
    http://www.philanthropyroundtable.org/topic/excellence_in_philanthropy/masters_class.
Munger, Charles. “Optimism Has No Place in Accounting.” Washington Post, April 4, 2002.
Munger, Charles. “Outstanding Investor Digest.” Speech, Stanford Law School Class of William Lazier,
    March 13, 1998.
Munger,        Charles.      Speech,      Harvard      Westlake     School,      January      19,  2010.
    http://www.valueinvestingworld.com/2012/10/santangels-review-transcript-of-charlie.html.
Munger, Charles. “Talk of Charles Munger to the Breakfast Meeting of the Philanthropy Roundtable.”
    Washington, DC, November 10, 2000. http://mungerisms.blogspot.com/2009/09/philanthropyround-
    table.html.
Munger, Charles. “The Great Financial Scandal of 2003.” Speech, Wesco Financial Corporation 2001
    Annual Meeting, 2001. http://www.bluechipinvestorfund.com/munger.html.
Munger, Charles. “Thought about Practical Thought.” Informal talk, July 20, 1996.
    http://www.scribd.com/doc/76174254/Mungers-Analysis-to-Build-a-Trillion-Dollar-Business-From-
    Scratch.
Munger, Charles. “Wantmore, Tweakmore, Totalscum, and the Tragedy of Boneheadia.” Slate, July 6, 2011.
    http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2011/07/wantmore_tweakmore_totalscum_and_the_tragedy_of_boneh
Mungerian. “2006 Wesco Meeting Notes.” The Motley Fool, May 11, 2006. http://boards.fool.com/2006-
    wesco-meeting-notes-long-rough-24092970.aspx.
Mungerisms.            “Westco         1999          Annual        Meeting”          Blogspot,     1999.
    http://mungerisms.blogspot.com/2009/08/wesco-1999-annualmeeting.html.
Mungerisms.        “Munger     Speaks     with    Kiplinger’s   Steven    Goldberg.”     Blogspot, 2005.
    http://mungerisms.blogspot.com/2009/09/munger-speaks-with-kiplingers-steven.html.
Neuroberk. “Westco Meeting.” The Motley Fool, May 7, 2000. http://boards.fool.com/here-are-neuroberks-
    notes-from-the-wesco-12529644.aspx.
NPR Staff. “Taking a Closer Look at Milgram's Shocking Obedience Study.” NPR, August 28, 2013.
    http://www.npr.org/2013/08/28/209559002/taking-a-closer-look-at-milgrams-shocking-obedience-
    study.
Pabrai, Mohnish. The Dhandho Investor. New York: Wiley, 2007.
Paladinvest. “Wesco Meeting.” The Motley Fool, May 7, 2000. http://boards.fool.com/wesco-meeting-
    12529248.aspx.
Parrish, Shane. “Michael Mauboussin Interview.” Farnam Street Blog, August 28, 2013.

[PDF PAGE 164]
    http://www.farnamstreetblog.com/2013/08/michael-mauboussin-interview-no-4.
Patterson, Scott. “Here’s the Story on Berkshire’s Munger.” Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2009.
    http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB124113732066375503#.
Pauls, Matt. “Notes from Berkshire Hathaway’s Annual Meeting, 2009.” Gurufocus, May 6, 2009.
    http://www.gurufocus.com/news/54571/notes-from-berkshirehathaways-annualmeeting-2009.
Pender,      Kathleen.     “Dueling      Views     of   Reform.”     SF     Gate,    June  22,    2004.
    http://www.sfgate.com/business/networth/article/Dueling-views-of-reform-2747436.php.
Porter, Michael. Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. New York: Free
    Press, 1998.
Porter, Michael. “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy.” Harvard Business Review, January
    2008.
Rappaport, Alfred, and Michael Mauboussin Expectations Investing, Reading Stock Prices for Better
    Returns. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2001.
Raza, Sheeraz. “Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting 2012.” Scribd, May 5, 2012.
    http://www.scribd.com/doc/92763946/BerkshireHathaway-AnnualMeeting-2012.
Report on Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting, Outstanding Investor Digest, 1997.
Report on Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting, Outstanding Investor Digest, December 31, 2014.
Richards,      Carl.    “Indexing     Is    No     Panacea    for   Investors.”   January  17,    2014.
    http://abnormalreturns.com/indexing-is-no-panacea-for-investor.
Ritholtz, Barry. “The Average Investor Needs Some Help.” Bloomberg View, April 9, 2014.
    http://www.bloombergview.com/articles/2014-04-09/the-average-investor-needs-some-help-ritholtz-
    chart.
Roughly Right. “2003 Wesco Annual Meeting Notes.” The Motley Fool, May 8, 2003.
    http://boards.fool.com/2003-wesco-annualmeeting-notes-19016644.aspx.
Roughly Right. “Berkshire Meeting Notes.” The Motley Fool, May 4, 2002. http://boards.fool.com/2003-
    wesco-annualmeeting-notes-19016644.aspx.
Samarrai, Farris. “Doing Something Is Better Than Doing Nothing for Most People, Study Shows.” UVA
    Today, July 3, 2014. https://news.virginia.edu/content/doing-something-better-doing-nothing-most-
    people-study-shows.
Sather, Dave. “Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Recap Part II.” Sather Financial, May 31, 2008.
    http://www.satherfinancial.com/index.php/commentaries/8/17-may2008-commentary-2.
Savitz, Eric. “The Wit and Wisdom of Charlie Munger.” Tech Trader Daily, Barron’s, June 26, 2006.
    http://blogs.barrons.com/techtraderdaily/2006/06/26/the-wit-and-wisdom-of-charlie-munger.
Schrage, Michael. “Daniel Kahneman: The Thought Leader Interview.” Strategy + Business, Winter 2003.
    http://www.strategy-business.com/article/03409.
Schroeder, Alice. The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life. New York: Random House, 2008.
Sellers, Patricia. “Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger’s Best Advice.” Fortune, October 31, 2013.
    http://postcards.blogs.fortune.cnn.com/2013/10/31/buffett-munger-best-advice.
Serwer,        Andy.        “Buffett’s       Alter      Ego.”      Fortune,       May     2,      2006.
    http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2006/05/29/8378052/index.htm.
Simon, Herbert. “How Managers Express Their Creativity.” The McKinsey Quar-terly, Autumn 1986.
Simpleinvestor.      “Free     Investment     Seminar.”    The    Motley    Fool,    May   25,    1999.
    http://boards.fool.com/Message.asp?mid=10893331.
Smith, Adam. “Supermoney.” New York: Random House, 1972.
Soros, George. The Alchemy of Finance. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987.
Sullivan, Tim. “Embracing Complexity.” Interview with Michael J. Mauboussin, Harvard Business Review,
    September 2011. http://hbr.org/2011/09/embracing-complexity/ar/1.
Taleb, Nassim. Antifragile. New York: Random House, 2012.
Taleb, Nassim. The Black Swan. New York: Random House, 2007.
Taleb, Nassim. Fooled by Randomness: The Hidden Role of Change in the Markets and in Life. Cheshire,
    UK: Texere, 2001.
Taleb, Nassim. How to Prevent Other Financial Crises. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network,

[PDF PAGE 165]
    2012. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2029092.
Taleb, Nassim. “The Skin in the Game Heuristic for Protection against Tail Events.” Nassim Taleb Website,
    2013. http://nassimtaleb.org/category/skin-in-the-game.
Teabone. “Wesco Meeting Notes.” The Motley Fool, May 5, 2005. http://boards.fool.com/wesco-meeting-
    notes-22447816.aspx.
Templeton, Lauren, and Scott Phillips. Investing the Templeton Way. New York: McGraw Hill, 2008.
Tetlock, Philip. Why Foxes Are Better Forecasters Than Hedgehogs. San Francisco: Long Now Foundation,
    2007.
Thaler, Richard. “What Scientific Idea Is Ready for Retirement?” Edge, 2014.
    http://www.edge.org/response-detail/25293.
Tilson, Whitney. “2006 Wesco Annual Meeting Notes.” Whitney Tilson’s Value Investing Website, May 11,
    2006. http://www.tilsonfunds.com/wscmtg06notes.pdf.
Tilson, Whitney. “The Best of Charlie Munger.” The Motley Fool, May 15, 2002.
    http://www.fool.com/news/foth/2002/foth020515.htm.
Tilson, Whitney. “Buffett’s Wit and Wisdom.” The Motley Fool, May 3, 2004.
    http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2004/05/03/buffetts-wit-and-wisdom.asp
Tilson, Whitney. “Charlie Munger Holds Court.” The Motley Fool, May 8, 2001.
    http://www.fool.com/news/foth/2001/foth010508.htm.
Tilson, Whitney. “Charlie Munger in Rare Form.” The Motley Fool, May 7, 2004.
    http://www.fool.com/server/printarticle.aspx?file=/investing/general/2004/05/07/charlie-munger-in-
    rare-form.aspx.
Tilson, Whitney. “Charlie Munger Speaks: Notes from the Wesco Annual Meeting.” The Motley Fool, May
    15, 2000. http://www.fool.com/boringport/2000/boringport00051500.htm.
Tilson, Whitney. “Charlie Munger’s Worldly Wisdom.” The Motley Fool, May 5, 2003.
    http://www.fool.com/news/2003/05/09/charlie-mungers-worldly-wisdom.aspx.
Tilson, Whitney. “Highlights from Berkshire’s Meeting.” The Motley Fool, May 8, 2002.
    http://www.fool.com/news/foth/2002/foth020508.htm.
Tilson,     Whitney.     “Munger      Goes     Mental.”    The     Motley     Fool,     June   4,    2004.
    http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2004/06/04/munger-goes-mental.aspx.
Tilson, Whitney. “Notes from the 2001 Wesco Annual Meeting.” Whitney Tilson’s Value Investing Website,
    April 28, 2001. http://www.tilsonfunds.com/motley_berkshire_wscmtg01notes.php.
Tilson, Whitney. “Notes from the 2003 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting.” Whitney Tilson’s Value
    Investing Website, May 3, 2003. http://www.tilsonfunds.com/motley_berkshire_brkmtg03notes.php.
Tilson, Whitney. “Notes from the 2005 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting.” Whitney Tilson’s Value
    Investing Website, April 30, 2005. http://www.tilsonfunds.com/brkmtg05notes.pdf.
Tilson, Whitney. “Notes from the 2003 Wesco Annual Meeting.” Whitney Tilson’s Value Investing Website,
    May 7, 2003. http://www.tilsonfunds.com/motley_berkshire_wscmtg01notes.php.
Tilson, Whitney. “Notes from the 2005 Wesco Annual Meeting.” Whitney Tilson’s Value Investing Website,
    May 4, 2005. www.tilsonfunds.com/wscmtg05notes.pdf.
Tilson, Whitney. “Notes from the Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting.” The Motley Fool, May 1, 2000.
Train, John. The Midas Touch. New York: Harper & Row, 1987.
Train, John. The Money Masters. New York: HarperCollins, 1980.
Twain, Mark. “Letter to Mrs. Foote.” December 2, 1887.
Warren, Gregory. “Berkshire Hathaway Retains Strong Competitive Advantage.” Morningstar, April 30,
    2014.     http://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/124079/berkshirehathaway-retains-strong-competitive-
    advantage.aspx.
“WESCO Annual Meeting May 2009.” In “The Best of Charlie Munger: 1994–2011. A Collection of
    Speeches, Essays, and Wesco Annual Meeting Notes.” (unpublished manuscript, 2012), comp. Bledsoe,
    Yanan Ma. http://www.valueplays.net/wp-content/uploads/The-Best-of-Charlie-Munger-1994-2011.pdf.
Whitman, Martin J. Value Investing: A Balanced Approach. New York: Wiley, 2000.
Williams, John Burr. The Theory of Investment Value. Flint Hill, VA: Fraser Publishing, 1997.
Zeckhauser, Richard. “Investing in the Unknown and Unknowable.” Rochester, NY: Social Science

[PDF PAGE 166]
   Research Network, 2006. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2205821.
Zweig, Jason. “Benjamin Graham: Building a Profession Classic Writings of the Father of Security
   Analysis.” New York: McGraw-Hill, 2010.
Zweig, Jason. “A Fireside Chat with Charlie Munger.” Wall Street Journal, September 12, 2014.
   http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/2014/09/12/a-fireside-chat-with-charlie-munger.
Zweig, Jason. “More Stocks May Not Make a Portfolio Safer.” Wall Street Journal, November 26, 2009.
   http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052748704533904574548003614347452.
Zweig, Jason. The Intelligent Investor (Revised edition). New York: Harper Business Essentials, 2006.
Zweig, Jason. “The Intelligent Investor: Saving Investors from Themselves.” Wall Street Journal, June 28,
   2013.         http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/2013/06/28/the-intelligent-investor-saving-investors-from-
   themselves.
Zweig, Jason. The Little Book of Safe Money: How to Conquer Killer Markets, Con Artists, and Yourself.
   Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2009.
Zweig,        Jason.       “The        Oracle       Speaks.”      Fortune,       May        2,        2005.
   http://money.cnn.com/2005/05/01/news/fortune500/buffett_talks/index.htm.
Zweig, Jason. Your Money and Your Brain: How the New Science of Neuroeconomics Can Help Make You
   Rich. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2008.
